《时尚女魔头》《The Devil Wears Prada》《穿普拉达的恶魔》英文原版

　　[美]维斯贝格尔（Weisberger,L.）
   
    时尚女魔头介绍：
　　畅销职场小说《时尚女魔头》《The Devil Wears Prada》，该书作者系全球顶级杂志《VOGUE》离职助理劳伦・魏丝伯格（Lauren Weisberger），以犀利幽默的笔触述了由一名大学毕业生跻身时尚圈内部的曲折离奇经历，影射出时尚界的众生百态，从某种程度上也揭示了时尚圈不为人知的内幕及真相。 
    劳伦・魏丝伯格本人就是一个从学校刚毕业不久的女孩，她在毕业之后进入了顶顶大名的美国《Vogue》杂志担任总编辑助理。大概在工作了一年后辞职，之后就写了这本书，把她自己的工作经历写了出来。书中那个号称是从 地狱里来的老板毫无疑问就是现实生活中的美国版《Vogue》主编Anna Wintour，由于“老百姓们对于名人及富人们的生活总是好奇的，如果这些家伙在光鲜外表之下还有那么些‘不太漂亮的事’那更是会掉足读者胃口。该书在国外一问世就引起广泛争议，尤其是时尚界反响强烈，雄踞《纽约时报》畅销排行近三十周。

　　本书作者是顶级杂志《VOGUE》离职助理，以笔触犀利的故事影射时尚真相。在国外一问世就引起广泛争议，尤其是时尚界反响强烈。小说中，刚刚大学毕业的安德里亚通过考试，进入挤满时尚杂志社的伊莱亚斯大楼，开始为这本美国销量最大、最有声望的《天桥》服务。她是主编米兰达的初级助理。不过帮助这个时尚界最有影响力的女人完成日常事务、看她编辑杂志、会见作家和模特到底意味着什么？米兰达是魔鬼一般的女人――她穿零号一线时装，吃熏肉、冰淇淋加喝星巴克却从不发胖，每天看九种报纸和七种杂志，嗜好爱玛仕纱巾，永远弄不清助理的名字。安德里亚任何时候都紧张焦虑。她终于发现自己没法再和男友保持正常关系，在巴黎的时装秀场，不知名的助理对时尚界的传奇人物说出了惊天动地的话……


　　1
　　The light hadn’t even officially turned green at the intersection of 
　　17th and Broadway before an army of overconfident yellow cabs roared 
　　past the tiny deathtrap I was attempting to navigate around the city 
　　streets.Clutch, gas, shift (neutral to first? Or first to 
　　second?),release clutch , I repeated over and over in my head, the 
　　mantra offering little comfort and even less direction amid the 
　　screeching midday traffic. The little car bucked wildly twice before 
　　it lurched forward through the intersection. My heart flip-flopped 
　　in my chest. Without warning, the lurching evened out and I began to 
　　pick up speed. Lots of speed. I glanced down to confirm visually 
　　that I was only in second gear, but the rear end of a cab loomed so 
　　large in the windshield that I could do nothing but jam my foot on 
　　the brake pedal so hard that my heel snapped off. Shit! Another pair 
　　of seven-hundred-dollar shoes sacrificed to my complete and utter 
　　lack of grace under pressure: this clocked in as my third such 
　　breakage this month. It was almost a relief when the car stalled 
　　(I’d obviously forgotten to press the clutch when attempting to 
　　brake for my life). I had a few seconds―peaceful seconds if one 
　　could overlook the angry honking and varied forms of the word “fuck” 
　　being hurled at me from all directions―to pull off my Manolos and 
　　toss them into the passenger seat. There was nowhere to wipe my 
　　sweaty hands except for the suede Gucci pants that hugged my thighs 
　　and hips so tightly they’d both begun to tingle within minutes of my 
　　securing the final button. My fingers left wet streaks across the 
　　supple suede that swathed the tops of my now numb thighs. Attempting 
　　to drive this $84,000 stick-shift convertible through the 
　　obstacle-fraught streets of midtown at lunchtime pretty much 
　　demanded that I smoke a cigarette.

　　“Fuckin’ move, lady!” hollered a swarthy driver whose chest hair 
　　threatened to overtake the wife-beater he wore. “What do you think 
　　this is? Fuckin’ drivin’ school? Get outta the way!”

　　I raised a shaking hand to give him the finger and then turned my 
　　attention to the Business at hand: getting nicotine coursing through 
　　my veins as quickly as possible. My hands were moist again with 
　　sweat, evidenced by the matches that kept slipping to the floor. The 
　　light turned green just as I managed to touch the fire to the end of 
　　the cigarette, and I was forced to leave it hanging between my lips 
　　as I negotiated the intricacies ofclutch, gas, shift (neutral to 
　　first? Or first to second?),release clutch, the smoke wafting in and 
　　out of my mouth with each and every breath. It was another three 
　　blocks before the car moved smoothly enough for me to remove the 
　　cigarette, but it was already too late: the precariously long line 
　　of spent ash had found its way directly to the sweat stain on the 
　　pants. Awesome. But before I could consider that, counting the 
　　Manolos, I’d wrecked $3,100 worth of merchandise in under three 
　　minutes, my Cell Phone bleated loudly. And as if the very essence of 
　　life itself didn’t suck enough at that particular moment, the caller 
　　ID confirmed my worst fear: it was Her. Miranda Priestly. My boss.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah! Ahn-dre-ah! Can you hear me, Ahn-dre-ah?” she trilled 
　　the moment I snapped my Motorola open―no small feat considering both 
　　of my (bare) feet and hands were already contending with various 
　　obligations. I propped the phone between my ear and shoulder and 
　　tossed the cigarette out the window, where it narrowly missed 
　　hitting a bike messenger. He screamed out a few highly unoriginal 
　　“fuck yous” before weaving forward.

　　“Yes, Miranda. Hi, I can hear you perfectly.”

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, where’s my car? Did you drop it off at the garage yet?”

　　The light ahead of me blessedly turned red and looked as though it 
　　might be a long one. The car jerked to a stop without hitting anyone 
　　or anything, and I breathed a sigh of relief. “I’m in the car right 
　　now, Miranda, and I should be at the garage in just a few minutes.” 
　　I figured she was probably concerned that everything was going well, 
　　so I reassured her that there were no problems whatsoever and we 
　　should both arrive shortly in perfect condition.

　　“Whatever,” she said brusquely, cutting me off midsentence. “I need 
　　you to pick up Madelaine and drop her off at the apartment before 
　　you come back to the office.” Click. The phone went dead. I stared 
　　at it for a few seconds before I realized that she’d deliberately 
　　hung up because she had provided all of the details I could hope to 
　　receive. Madelaine. Who the hell was Madelaine? Where was she at the 
　　moment? Did she know I was to pick her up? Why was she going back to 
　　Miranda’s apartment? And why on earth―considering Miranda had a 
　　full-time driver, housekeeper, and nanny―was I the one who had to do 
　　it?

　　Remembering that it was illegal to talk on a Cell Phone while 
　　driving in New York and figuring the last thing I needed at that 
　　moment was a run-in with the NYPD, I pulled into the bus lane and 
　　switched my flashers on.Breathe in, breathe out, I coached myself, 
　　even remembering to apply the parking brake before taking my foot 
　　off the regular one. It had been years since I’d driven a 
　　stick-shift car―five years, actually, since a high school boyfriend 
　　had volunteered his car up for a few lessons that I’d decidedly 
　　flunked―but Miranda hadn’t seemed to consider that when she’d called 
　　me into her office an hour and a half earlier.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, my car needs to be picked up from the place and dropped 
　　off at the garage. Attend to it immediately, as we’ll be needing it 
　　tonight to drive to the Hamptons. That’s all.” I stood, rooted to 
　　the carpet in front of her behemoth desk, but she’d already blocked 
　　out my presence entirely. Or so I thought. “That’sall, Ahn-dre-ah. 
　　See to it right now,” she added, still not glancing up.

　　Ah, sure, Miranda,I thought to myself as I walked away, trying to 
　　figure out the first step in the assignment that was sure to have a 
　　million pitfalls along the way. First was definitely to find out at 
　　which “place” the car was located. Most likely it was being repaired 
　　at the dealership, but it could obviously be at any one of a million 
　　auto shops in any one of the five boroughs. Or perhaps she’d lent it 
　　to a friend and it was currently occupying an expensive spot in a 
　　full-service garage somewhere on Park Avenue? Of course, there was 
　　always the chance that she was referring to a new car―brand 
　　unknown―that she’d just recently purchased that hadn’t yet been 
　　brought Home from the (unknown) dealership. I had a lot of work to 
　　do.

　　I started by calling Miranda’s nanny, but her Cell Phone went 
　　straight to voice mail. The housekeeper was next on the list and, 
　　for once, a big help. She was able to tell me that the car wasn’t 
　　brand-new and it was in fact a “convertible sports car in British 
　　racing green,” and that it was usually parked in a garage on 
　　Miranda’s block, but she had no idea what the make was or where it 
　　might currently be residing. Next on the list was Miranda’s 
　　husband’s assistant, who informed me that, as far as she knew, the 
　　couple owned a top-of-the-line black Lincoln Navigator and some sort 
　　of small green Porsche. Yes! I had my first lead. One quick phone 
　　call to the Porsche dealership on Eleventh Avenue revealed that yes, 
　　they had just finished touching up the paint and installing a new 
　　disc-changer in a green Carrera 4 Cabriolet for a Ms. Miranda 
　　Priestly. Jackpot!

　　I ordered a Town Car to take me to the dealership, where I turned 
　　over a note I’d forged with Miranda’s signature that instructed them 
　　to release the car to me. No one seemed to care whatsoever that I 
　　was in no way related to this woman, that some stranger had cruised 
　　into the place and requested someone else’s Porsche. They tossed me 
　　the keys and only laughed when I’d asked them to back it out of the 
　　garage because I wasn’t sure I could handle a stick shift in 
　　reverse. It’d taken me a half hour to get ten blocks, and I still 
　　hadn’t figured out where or how to turn around so I’d actually be 
　　heading uptown, toward the parking place on Miranda’s block that her 
　　housekeeper had described. The chances of my making it to 76th and 
　　Fifth without seriously injuring myself, the car, a biker, a 
　　pedestrian, or another vehicle were nonexistent, and this new call 
　　did nothing to calm my nerves.

　　Once again, I made the round of calls, but this time Miranda’s nanny 
　　picked up on the second ring.

　　“Cara, hey, it’s me.”

　　“Hey, what’s up? Are you on the street? It sounds so loud.”

　　“Yeah, you could say that. I had to pick up Miranda’s Porsche from 
　　the dealership. Only, I can’t really drive stick. But now she called 
　　and wants me to pick up someone named Madelaine and drop her off at 
　　the apartment. Who the hell is Madelaine and where might she be?”

　　Cara laughed for what felt like ten minutes before she said, 
　　“Madelaine’s their French bulldog puppy and she’s at the vet. Just 
　　got spayed. I was supposed to pick her up, but Miranda just called 
　　and told me to pick the twins up early from school so they can all 
　　head out to the Hamptons.”

　　“You’re joking. I have to pick up a fuckingdog with this Porsche? 
　　Without crashing? It’snever going to happen .”

　　“She’s at the East Side Animal Hospital, on Fifty-second between 
　　First and Second. Sorry, Andy, I have to get the girls now, but call 
　　if there’s anything I can do, OK?”

　　Maneuvering the green beast to head uptown sapped my last reserves 
　　of concentration, and by the time I reached Second Avenue, the 
　　stress sent my body into meltdown.It couldn’t possibly get worse 
　　than this, I thought as yet another cab came within a quarter-inch 
　　of the back bumper. A nick anywhere on the car would guarantee I 
　　lose my job―that much was obvious―but it just might cost me my life 
　　as well. Since there was obviously not a parking spot, legal or 
　　otherwise, in the middle of the day, I called the vet’s office from 
　　outside and asked them to bring Madelaine to me. A kindly woman 
　　emerged a few minutes later (just enough time for me to field 
　　another call from Miranda, this one asking why I wasn’t back at the 
　　office yet) with a whimpering, sniffling puppy. The woman showed me 
　　Madelaine’s stitched-up belly and told me to drive very, very 
　　carefully because the dog was “experiencing some discomfort.” Right, 
　　lady. I’m driving very, very carefully solely to save my job and 
　　possibly my life―if the dog benefits from this, it’s just a bonus.

　　With Madelaine curled up on the passenger seat, I lit another 
　　cigarette and rubbed my freezing bare feet so my toes could resume 
　　gripping the clutch and brake pedal.Clutch, gas, shift, release 
　　clutch, I chanted, trying to ignore the dog’s pitiful howls every 
　　time I accelerated. She alternated between crying, whining, and 
　　snorting. By the time we reached Miranda’s building, the pup was 
　　nearly hysterical. I tried to soothe her, but she could sense my 
　　insincerity―and besides, I had no free hands with which to offer a 
　　reassuring pat or nuzzle. So this was what four years of diagramming 
　　and deconstructing books, plays, short stories, and poems were for: 
　　a chance to comfort a small, white, batlike bulldog while trying not 
　　to demolish someone else’s really, really expensive car. Sweet life. 
　　Just as I had always dreamed.

　　I managed to dump the car at the garage and the dog with Miranda’s 
　　doorman without further incident, but my hands were still shaking 
　　when I climbed into the chauffeured Town Car that had been following 
　　me all over town. The driver looked at me sympathetically and made 
　　some supportive comment about the difficulty of stick shifts, but I 
　　didn’t feel much like chatting.

　　“Just heading back to the Elias-Clark building,” I said with a long 
　　sigh as the driver pulled around the block and headed south on Park 
　　Avenue. Since I rode the route every day―sometimes twice―I knew I 
　　had exactly eight minutes to breathe and collect myself and possibly 
　　even figure out a way to disguise the ash and sweat stains that had 
　　become permanent features on the Gucci suede. The shoes―well, those 
　　were beyond hope, at least until they could be fixed by the fleet of 
　　shoemakersRunway kept for such emergencies. The ride was actually 
　　over in six and a half minutes, and I had no choice but to hobble 
　　like an off-balance giraffe on my one flat, one four-inch heel 
　　arrangement. A quick stop in the Closet turned up a brand-new pair 
　　of knee-high maroon-colored Jimmy Choos that looked great with the 
　　leather skirt I grabbed, tossing the suede pants in the “Couture 
　　Cleaning” pile (where the basic prices for dry cleaning started at 
　　seventy-five dollars per item). The only stop left was a quick visit 
　　to the Beauty Closet, where one of the editors there took one look 
　　at my sweat-streaked makeup and whipped out a trunk full of fixers.

　　Not bad,I thought, looking in one of the omnipresent full-length 
　　mirrors. You might not even know that mere minutes before I was 
　　hovering precariously close to murdering myself and everyone around 
　　me. I strolled confidently into the assistants’ suite outside 
　　Miranda’s office and quietly took my seat, looking forward to a few 
　　free minutes before she returned from lunch.

　　“And-re-ah,” she called from her starkly furnished, deliberately 
　　cold office. “Where are the car and the puppy?”

　　I leaped out of my seat and ran as fast as was possible on plush 
　　carpeting while wearing five-inch heels and stood before her desk. 
　　“I left the car with the garage attendant and Madelaine with your 
　　doorman, Miranda,” I said, proud to have completed both tasks 
　　without killing the car, the dog, or myself.

　　“And why would you do something like that?” she snarled, looking up 
　　from her copy ofWomen’s Wear Daily for the first time since I’d 
　　walked in. “I specifically requested that you bring both of them to 
　　the office, since the girls will be here momentarily and we need to 
　　leave.”

　　“Oh, well, actually, I thought you said that you wanted them to―”

　　“Enough. The details of your incompetence interest me very little. 
　　Go get the car and the puppy and bring them here. I’m expecting 
　　we’ll be all ready to leave in fifteen minutes. Understood?”

　　Fifteen minutes? Was this woman hallucinating? It would take a 
　　minute or two to get downstairs and into a Town Car, another six or 
　　eight to get to her apartment, and then somewhere in the vicinity of 
　　three hours for me to find the puppy in her eighteen-room apartment, 
　　extract the bucking stick shift from its parking spot, and make my 
　　way the twenty blocks to the office.

　　“Of course, Miranda. Fifteen minutes.”

　　I started shaking again the moment I ran out of her office, 
　　wondering if my heart could just up and give out at the ripe old age 
　　of twenty-three. The first cigarette I lit landed directly on the 
　　top of my new Jimmys, where instead of falling to the cement it 
　　smoldered for just long enough to burn a small, neat hole.Great, I 
　　muttered.That’s just fucking great. Chalk up my total as an even 
　　four grand for today’s ruined merchandise―a new personal best. Maybe 
　　she’d die before I got back, I thought, deciding that now was the 
　　time to look on the bright side. Maybe, just maybe, she’d keel over 
　　from something rare and exotic and we’d all be released from her 
　　wellspring of misery. I relished a last drag before stamping out the 
　　cigarette and told myself to be rational.You don’t want her to die, 
　　I thought, stretching out in the backseat.Because if she does, you 
　　lose all hope of killing her yourself. And thatwould be a shame.

　　2

　　I knew nothing when I went for my first interview and stepped onto 
　　the infamous Elias-Clark elevators, those transporters of all 
　　thingsen vogue . I had no idea that the city’s most well-connected 
　　gossip columnists and socialites and media executives obsessed over 
　　the flawlessly made-up, turned-out, turned-in riders of those sleek 
　　and quiet lifts. I had never seen women with such radiant blond 
　　hair, didn’t know that those brand-name highlights cost six grand a 
　　year to maintain or that others in the know could identify the 
　　colorists after a quick glance at the finished product. I had never 
　　laid eyes on such beautiful men. They were perfectly toned―not too 
　　muscular because “that’snot sexy”―and they showed off their lifelong 
　　dedication to gymwork in finely ribbed turtlenecks and tight leather 
　　pants. Bags and shoes I’d never seen on real people shoutedPrada! 
　　Armani! Versace! from every surface. I had heard from a friend of a 
　　friend―an editorial assistant atChic magazine―that every now and 
　　then the accessories get to meet their makers in those very 
　　elevators, a touching reunion where Miuccia, Giorgio, or Donatella 
　　can once again admire their summer ’02 stilettos or their spring 
　　couture teardrop bag in person. I knew things were changing for me―I 
　　just wasn’t sure it was for the better.

　　I had, until this point, spent the past twenty-three years embodying 
　　small-town America. My entire existence was a perfect cliché. 
　　Growing up in Avon, Connecticut, had meant high school sports, youth 
　　group meetings, “drinking parties” at nice suburban ranch Homes when 
　　the parents were away. We wore sweatpants to school, jeans for 
　　Saturday night, ruffled puffiness for semiformal dances. And 
　　college! Well, that was a world of sophistication after high school. 
　　Brown had provided endless activities and classes and groups for 
　　every imaginable type of artist, misfit, and computer geek. Whatever 
　　intellectual or creative interest I wanted to pursue, regardless of 
　　how esoteric or unpopular it may have been, had some sort of outlet 
　　at Brown. High fashion was perhaps the single exception to this 
　　widely bragged-about fact. Four years spent muddling around 
　　Providence in fleeces and hiking boots, learning about the French 
　　impressionists, and writing obnoxiously long-winded English papers 
　　did not―in any conceivable way―prepare me for my very first 
　　postcollege job.

　　I managed to put it off as long as possible. For the three months 
　　following graduation, I’d scrounged together what little cash I 
　　could find and took off on a solo trip. I did Europe by train for a 
　　month, spending much more time on beaches than in museums, and 
　　didn’t do a very good job of keeping in touch with anyone back Home 
　　except Alex, my boyfriend of three years. He knew that after the 
　　five weeks or so I was starting to get lonely, and since his Teach 
　　for America training had just ended and he had the rest of the 
　　summer to kill before starting in September, he surprised me in 
　　Amsterdam. I’d covered most of Europe by then and he’d traveled the 
　　summer before, so after a not-so-sober afternoon at one of the 
　　Coffee shops, we pooled our traveler’s checks and bought two one-way 
　　tickets to Bangkok.

　　Together we worked our way through much of Southeast Asia, rarely 
　　spending more than $10 a day, and talked obsessively about our 
　　futures. He was so excited to start teaching English at one of the 
　　city’s underprivileged schools, totally taken with the idea of 
　　shaping young minds and mentoring the poorest and the most 
　　neglected, in the way that only Alex could be. My goals were not so 
　　lofty: I was intent on finding a job in magazine publishing. 
　　Although I knew it was highly unlikely I’d get hired atThe New 
　　Yorker directly out of school, I was determined to be writing for 
　　them before my fifth reunion. It was all I’d ever wanted to do, the 
　　only place I’d ever really wanted to work. I’d picked up a copy for 
　　the first time after I’d heard my parents discussing an article 
　　they’d just read and my mom had said, “It was so well written―you 
　　just don’t read things like that anymore,” and my father had agreed, 
　　“No doubt, it’s the only smart thing being written today.” I’d loved 
　　it. Loved the snappy reviews and the witty cartoons and the feeling 
　　of being admitted to a special, members-only club for readers. I’d 
　　read every issue for the past seven years and knew every section, 
　　every editor, and every writer by heart.

　　Alex and I talked about how we were both embarking on a new stage in 
　　our lives, how we were lucky to be doing it together. We weren’t in 
　　any rush to get back, though, somehow sensing that this would be the 
　　last period of calm before the craziness, and we stupidly extended 
　　our visas in Delhi so we could have a few extra weeks touring in the 
　　exotic countryside of India.

　　Well, nothing ends the romance more swiftly than amoebic dysentery. 
　　I lasted a week in a filthy Indian hostel, begging Alex not to leave 
　　me for dead in that hellish place. Four days later we landed in 
　　Newark and my worried mother tucked me into the backseat of her car 
　　and clucked the entire way home. In a way it was a Jewish mother’s 
　　dream, a real reason to visit doctor after doctor after doctor, 
　　making absolutely sure that every miserable parasite had abandoned 
　　her little girl. It took four weeks for me to feel human again and 
　　another two until I began to feel that living at Home was 
　　unbearable. Mom and Dad were great, but being asked where I was 
　　going every time I left the house―or where I’d been every time I 
　　returned―got old quickly. I called Lily and asked if I could crash 
　　on the couch of her tiny Harlem studio. Out of the kindness of her 
　　heart, she agreed.

　　I woke up in that tiny Harlem studio, sweat-soaked. My forehead 
　　pounded, my stomach churned, every nerve shimmied ―shimmied in a 
　　very unsexy way. Ah! It’s back, I thought, horrified. The parasites 
　　had found their way back into my body and I was bound to suffer 
　　eternally! Or what if it was worse? Perhaps I’d contracted a rare 
　　form of late-developing dengue fever? Malaria? Possibly even Ebola? 
　　I lay in silence, trying to come to grips with my imminent death, 
　　when snippets from the night before came back to me. A smoky bar 
　　somewhere in the East Village. Something called jazz fusion music. A 
　　hot-pink drink in a martini glassoh, nausea, oh, make it stop. 
　　Friends stopping by to welcome me Home. A toast, a gulp, another 
　　toast. Oh, thank god―it wasn't a rare strain of hemorrhagic fever, 
　　it was just a hangover. It never occurred to me that I couldn’t 
　　exactly hold my liquor anymore after losing twenty pounds to 
　　dysentery. Five feet ten inches and 115 pounds did not bode well for 
　　a hard night out (although, in retrospect, it boded very well for 
　　employment at a fashion magazine).

　　I bravely extracted myself from the crippling couch I’d been 
　　crashing on for the past week and concentrated all my energy on not 
　　getting sick. Adjustment to America―the food, the manners, the 
　　glorious showers―hadn’t been too grueling, but the houseguest thing 
　　was quickly becoming stale. I figured I had about a week and a half 
　　left of exchanging leftover baht and rupees before I completely ran 
　　out of cash, and the only way to get money from my parents was to 
　　return to the never-ending circuit of second opinions. That sobering 
　　thought was the single thing propelling me from bed, on what would 
　　be a fateful November day, to where I was expected in one hour for 
　　my very first job interview. I’d spent the last week parked on 
　　Lily’s couch, still weak and exhausted, until she finally yelled at 
　　me to leave―if only for a few hours each day. Not sure what else to 
　　do with myself, I bought a MetroCard and rode the subways, 
　　listlessly dropping off résumés as I went. I left them with security 
　　guards at all the big magazine publishers, with a halfhearted cover 
　　letter explaining that I wanted to be an editorial assistant and 
　　gain some magazine writing experience. I was too weak and tired to 
　　care if anyone actually read them, and the last thing I was 
　　expecting was an interview. But Lily’s phone had rung just the day 
　　before and, amazingly, someone from human resources at Elias-Clark 
　　wanted me to come in for a “chat.” I wasn’t sure if it would be 
　　considered an official interview or not, but a “chat” sounded more 
　　palatable either way.

　　I washed down Advil with Pepto and managed to assemble a jacket and 
　　pants that did not match and in no way created a suit, but at least 
　　they stayed put on my emaciated frame. A blue button-down, a 
　　not-too-perky ponytail, and a pair of slightly scuffed flats 
　　completed my look. It wasn’t great―in fact, it bordered on supremely 
　　ugly―but it would have to suffice.They’re not going to hire me or 
　　reject me on the outfit alone, I remember thinking. Clearly, I was 
　　barely lucid.

　　I showed up on time for my elevenA .M. interview and didn’t panic 
　　until I encountered the line of leggy, Twiggy types waiting to be 
　　permitted to board the elevators. Their lips never stopped moving, 
　　and their gossip was punctuated only by the sound of their stilettos 
　　clacking on the floor.Clackers, I thought.That’s perfect. (The 
　　elevators!)Breathe in, breathe out, I reminded myself.You will not 
　　throw up. You will not throw up. You’re just here to talk about 
　　being an editorial assistant, and then it’s straight back to the 
　　couch. You will not throw up. “Why yes, I’d love to work at 
　　Reaction!Well, sure, I supposeThe Buzzwould be suitable. Oh, what? I 
　　may have my pick? Well, I’ll need the night to decide between there 
　　and Maison Vous.Delightful!”

　　Moments later I was sporting a rather unflattering “guest” sticker 
　　on my rather unflattering pseudosuit (not soon enough, I discovered 
　　that guests in the know simply stuck these passes on their bags, or, 
　　even better, discarded them immediately―only the most uncouth losers 
　　actuallywore them) and heading toward the elevators. And then . . . 
　　I boarded. Up, up, up and away, hurtling through space and time and 
　　infinite sexiness en route to . . . human resources.

　　I allowed myself to relax for a moment or two during that swift, 
　　quiet ride. Deep, pouty perfumes mixed with the smell of fresh 
　　leather to turn those elevators from the merely functional to the 
　　almost erotic. We whisked between floors, stopping to let out the 
　　beauties atChic, Mantra, The Buzz, andCoquette . The doors opened 
　　silently, reverently, to stark white reception areas. Chic furniture 
　　with clean, simple lines dared people to sit, ready to scream out in 
　　agony if anyone―horror!―spilled. The magazines’ names rested in bold 
　　black and identifiable, individual typeface along the walls that 
　　flanked the lobby. Thick, opaque glass doors protected the titles. 
　　They’re names the average American recognizes but never imagines to 
　　be turning and churning and spinning under one very high city roof.

　　While I’d admittedly never held a job more impressive than frozen 
　　yogurt scooper, I’d heard enough stories from my newly minted 
　　professional friends to know that corporate life just didn’t look 
　　like this. Not even close. Absent were the nauseating fluorescent 
　　lights, the never-shows-dirt carpeting. Where dowdy secretaries 
　　should have been ensconced, polished young girls with prominent 
　　cheekbones and power suits presided. Office supplies didn’t exist! 
　　Those basic necessities like organizers, garbage cans, and books 
　　were simply not present. I watched as six floors disappeared in 
　　swirls of white perfection before I felt the venom and heard the 
　　voice.

　　“She. Is. Such. A. Bitch! Icannot deal with her anymore. Who does 
　　that? I mean, really―WHO DOES THAT?” hissed a twenty-something girl 
　　in a snakeskin skirt and a very mini tank top, looking more suited 
　　for a late night at Bungalow 8 than a day at the office.

　　“I know. Iknooooooow. Like, what do you think I’ve had to put up 
　　with for the past six months? Total bitch. And terrible taste, too,” 
　　agreed her friend, with an emphatic shake of her adorable bob.

　　Mercifully, I arrived at my floor and the elevator slid 
　　open.Interesting, I thought. If you’re comparing this potential work 
　　environment to an average day in the life of a cliquey junior high 
　　girl, it might even be better. Stimulating? Well, maybe not. Kind, 
　　sweet, nurturing? No, not exactly. The kind of place that just makes 
　　you want to smile and do a great job? No, OK? No! But if you’re 
　　looking for fast, thin, sophisticated, impossibly hip, and 
　　heart-wrenchingly stylish, Elias-Clark is mecca.

　　The gorgeous jewelry and impeccable makeup of the human resources 
　　receptionist did nothing to allay my overwhelming feelings of 
　　inadequacy. She told me to sit and “feel free to look over some of 
　　our titles.” Instead, I tried frantically to memorize the names of 
　　all the editors in chief of the company’s titles―as if they were 
　　going to actually quiz me on them. Ha! I already knew Stephen 
　　Alexander, of course, forReaction magazine, and it wasn’t too hard 
　　to rememberThe Buzz ’s Tanner Michel. Those were really the only 
　　interesting things they published anyway, I figured. I’d do fine.

　　A short, svelte woman introduced herself as Sharon. “So, dear, 
　　you’re looking to break into magazines, are you?” she asked as she 
　　led me past a string of long-legged model look-alikes to her stark, 
　　cold office. “It’s a tough thing to do right out of college, you 
　　know. Lots and lots of competition out there for very few jobs. And 
　　the few jobs that are available, well! They’re not exactly 
　　high-paying, if you know what I mean.”

　　I looked down at my cheap, mismatched suit and very wrong shoes and 
　　wondered why I’d even bothered. Already deep in thought over how I 
　　was going to crawl back to that sofa bed with enough Cheez-Its and 
　　cigarettes to last a fortnight, I barely noticed when she almost 
　　whispered, “But I have to say, there’s an amazing opportunity open 
　　right now, and it’s going to go fast!”

　　Hmm. My antennae perked up as I tried to force her to make eye 
　　contact with me. Opportunity? Go fast? My mind was racing. She 
　　wanted to help me? She liked me? Why, I hadn’t even opened my mouth 
　　yet―how could shelike me? And why exactly was she starting to sound 
　　like a car salesman?

　　“Dear, can you tell me the name of the editor in chief ofRunway ?” 
　　she asked, looking pointedly at me for the first time since I’d sat 
　　down.

　　Blank. Completely and totally blank, I couldn’t remember a thing. I 
　　couldn’t believe she wasquizzing me! I’d never read an issue 
　　ofRunway in my life―she wasn’t allowed to ask me aboutthat one. No 
　　one cared aboutRunway . It was afashion magazine, for chrissake, one 
　　I wasn’t even sure contained any writing, just lots of 
　　hungry-looking models and glossy ads. I stammered for a moment or 
　　two, while the different names of editors I’d just before forced my 
　　brain to remember all swirled inside my head, dancing together in 
　　mismatched pairs. Somewhere in the deep recesses of my mind, I was 
　　sure I knew her name―after all, who didn’t? But it wouldn’t gel in 
　　my addled brain.

　　“Uh, well, it seems I can’t recall her name right now. But I know I 
　　know it, of course I know it. Everyone knows who she is! I just, 
　　well, don’t, uh, seem to know it right now.”

　　She peered at me for a moment, her large brown eyes finally fixated 
　　on my now perspiring face. “Miranda Priestly,” she near-whispered, 
　　with a mixture of reverence and fear. “Her name is Miranda 
　　Priestly.”

　　Silence ensued. For what felt like a full minute, neither of us said 
　　a word, but then Sharon must have made the decision to overlook my 
　　crucial misstep. I didn’t know then that she was desperate to hire 
　　another assistant for Miranda, couldn’t know that she was desperate 
　　to stop this woman from calling her day and night, grilling her 
　　about potential candidates. Desperate to find someone, anyone, whom 
　　Miranda wouldn’t reject. And if I might―however unlikely―stand even 
　　the smallest chance of getting hired and thereby relieve her, well, 
　　then attention must be paid.

　　Sharon smiled tersely and told me I was going to meet with Miranda’s 
　　two assistants.Two assistants?

　　“Why yes,” she confirmed with an exasperated look. “Of course 
　　Miranda needs two assistants. Her current senior assistant, Allison, 
　　has been promoted to beRunway ’s beauty editor, and Emily, the 
　　junior assistant, will be taking Allison’s place. That leaves the 
　　junior position open for someone!

　　“Andrea, I know you’ve just graduated from college and probably 
　　aren’t entirely familiar with the inner workings of the magazine 
　　world . . .” She paused dramatically, searching for the right words. 
　　“But I feel it’s my duty, myobligation, to tell you what a truly 
　　incredible opportunity this is. Miranda Priestly . . .” She paused 
　　again just as dramatically, as though she were mentally bowing. 
　　“Miranda Priestly is the single most influential woman in the 
　　fashion industry, and clearly one of the most prominent magazine 
　　editors in the world. The world! The chance to work for her, to 
　　watch her edit and meet with famous writers and models, to help her 
　　achieve all she doeseach and every day, well, I shouldn’t need to 
　　tell you that it’s a job a million girls would die for.”

　　“Um, yeah, I mean yes, that does sound wonderful,” I said, briefly 
　　wondering why Sharon was trying to talk me into something that a 
　　million other people would die for. But there wasn’t time to think 
　　about it. She picked up the phone and sang a few words, and within 
　　minutes she’d escorted me to the elevators to begin my interviews 
　　with Miranda’s two assistants.

　　I thought Sharon was starting to sound a bit like a robot, but then 
　　came my meeting with Emily. I found my way down to the seventeenth 
　　floor and waited inRunway ’s unnervingly white reception area. It 
　　took just over a half hour before a tall, thin girl emerged from 
　　behind the glass doors. A calf-length leather skirt hung from her 
　　hips, and her unruly red hair was piled in one of those messy but 
　　still glamorous buns on top of her head. Her skin was flawless and 
　　pale, not so much as a single freckle or blemish, and it stretched 
　　perfectly over the highest cheekbones I’d ever seen. She didn’t 
　　smile. She sat next to me and looked me over, earnestly but with 
　　little apparent interest. Perfunctory. And then, unprompted and 
　　still having not introduced herself, the girl I presumed to be Emily 
　　launched into a description of the job. The monotone of her 
　　statements told me more than all of her words: she’d obviously gone 
　　through this dozens of times already, had little faith that I was 
　　any different from the rest, and as a result wouldn’t be wasting 
　　much time with me.

　　“It’s hard, no doubt about it. There will be fourteen-hour days, you 
　　know―not often, but often enough,” she rattled on, still not looking 
　　at me. “And it’s important to understand that there will be no 
　　editorial work. As Miranda’s junior assistant, you’d be solely 
　　responsible for anticipating her needs and accommodating them. Now, 
　　that could be anything from ordering her favorite stationery to 
　　accompanying her on a shopping trip. Either way, it’s always fun. I 
　　mean, you get to spend day after day, week after week, with this 
　　absolutely amazing woman. And amazing she is,” she breathed, looking 
　　slightly animated for the first time since we started speaking.

　　“Sounds great,” I said and meant it. My friends who’d begun working 
　　immediately after graduation had already clocked in six full months 
　　in their entry-level jobs, and they all sounded wretched. Banks, 
　　advertising firms, book publishing houses―it didn’t matter―they were 
　　all utterly miserable. They whined about the long days, the 
　　coworkers, and the office politics, but more than anything else, 
　　they complained bitterly about the boredom. Compared with school, 
　　the tasks required of them were mindless, unnecessary, fit for a 
　　chimp. They spoke of the many, many hours spent plugging numbers in 
　　databases and cold-calling people who didn’t want to be called. Of 
　　listlessly cataloging years’ worth of information on a computer 
　　screen and researching entirely irrelevant subjects for months on 
　　end so their supervisors thought they were productive. Each swore 
　　she’d actually gotten dumber in the short amount of time since 
　　graduation, and there was no escape in sight. I might not 
　　particularly love fashion, but I’d sure rather do something “fun” 
　　all day long than get sucked into a more boring job.

　　“Yes. It is great. Just great. I mean, really, really great. Anyway, 
　　nice to meet you. I’m going to go get Allison for you to meet. She’s 
　　great, too.” Almost as quickly as she finished and departed behind 
　　the glass in a rustle of leather and curls, a coltish figure 
　　appeared.

　　This striking black girl introduced herself as Allison, Miranda’s 
　　senior assistant who’d just been promoted, and I knew immediately 
　　that she was simplytoo thin. But I couldn’t even focus on the way 
　　her stomach caved inward and her pelvic bones pushed out because I 
　　was captivated by the fact she exposed her stomach at work at all. 
　　She wore black leather pants, as soft as they were tight, and a 
　　fuzzy (or was it furry?) white tank top strained across her breasts 
　　and ended two inches above her belly button. Her long hair was as 
　　dark as ink and hung across her back like a thick, shiny blanket. 
　　Her fingers and toes were polished with a luminescent white color, 
　　appearing to glow from within, and her open-toe sandals gave her 
　　already six-foot frame an additional three inches. She managed to 
　　look incredibly sexy, seminaked, and classy all at the same time, 
　　but to me she looked mostly cold. Literally. It was, after all, 
　　November.

　　“Hi, I’m Allison, as you probably know,” she started, picking some 
　　of the tank top fur from her barely there leather-clad thigh. “I was 
　　just promoted to an editor position, and that’s the really great 
　　thing about working for Miranda. Yes, the hours are long and the 
　　work is tough, but it’s incredibly glamorous and a million girls 
　　would die to do it. And Miranda is such a wonderful woman, 
　　editor,person, that she really takes care of her own girls. You’ll 
　　skip years and years of working your way up the ladder by working 
　　just one year for her; if you’re talented, she’ll send you straight 
　　to the top, and . . .” She rambled on, not bothering to look up or 
　　feign any level of passion for what she was saying. Although I 
　　didn’t get the impression she was particularly dumb, her eyes were 
　　glazed over in the way seen only in cult members or the brainwashed. 
　　I had the distinct impression I could fall asleep, pick my nose, or 
　　simply leave and she wouldn’t necessarily notice.

　　When she finally wrapped things up and went to go notify yet another 
　　interviewer, I nearly collapsed on the unwelcoming reception-area 
　　sofas. It was all happening so fast, spiraling out of control, and 
　　yet I was excited. So what if I didn’t know who Miranda Priestly 
　　was? Everyone else certainly seemed impressed enough. Yeah, so it’s 
　　a fashion magazine and not something a little more interesting, but 
　　it’s a hell of a lot better to work atRunway than some horrible 
　　trade publication somewhere, right? The prestige of havingRunway on 
　　my résumé was sure to give me even more credibility when I 
　　eventually applied to work atThe New Yorker than, say, havingPopular 
　　Mechanics there. Besides, I’m sure a million girlswould die for this 
　　job.

　　After a half hour of such ruminations, another tall and impossibly 
　　thin girl came to the reception area. She told me her name but I 
　　couldn’t focus on anything except her body. She wore a tight, 
　　shredded denim skirt, a see-through white button-down, and strappy 
　　silver sandals. She was also perfectly tanned and manicured and 
　　exposed in such a way that normal people are not when there’s snow 
　　on the ground. It wasn’t until she actually motioned for me to 
　　follow her back through the glass doors and I had to stand up that I 
　　became acutely aware of my own horrendously inappropriate suit, limp 
　　hair, and utter lack of accessories, jewelry, and grooming. To this 
　　day, the thought of what I wore―and that I carried something 
　　resembling abriefcase ―continues to haunt me. I can feel my face 
　　flame red as I remember how very, very awkward I was among the most 
　　toned and stylish women in New York City. I didn’t know until later, 
　　until I hovered on the periphery of being one of them, just how much 
　　they had laughed at me between the rounds of the interview.

　　After the requisite look-over, Knockout Girl led me to Cheryl 
　　Kerston’s office,Runway ’s executive editor and all-around lovable 
　　lunatic. She, too, talked at me for what seemed like hours, but this 
　　time I actually listened. I listened because she seemed to love her 
　　job, speaking excitedly about the “words” aspect of the magazine, 
　　the wonderful copy she reads and writers she manages and editors she 
　　oversees.

　　“I have absolutely nothing to do with the fashion side of this 
　　place,” she declared proudly, “so it’s best to save those questions 
　　for someone else.”

　　When I told her that it was really her job that sounded appealing, 
　　that I had no particular interest or background in fashion, her 
　　smile broadened to a genuine grin. “Well, in that case, Andrea, you 
　　might be just what we need around here. I think it’s time for you to 
　　meet Miranda. And if I may offer a piece of advice? Look her 
　　straight in the eye and sell yourself. Sell yourself hard and she’ll 
　　respect it.”

　　As if on cue, Knockout Girl swept in to escort me to Miranda’s 
　　office. It was only a thirty-second walk, but I could sense that all 
　　eyes were on me. They peered at me from behind the frosted glass of 
　　the editor’s office and from the open space of the assistants’ 
　　cubicles. A beauty at the copier turned to check me out, and so did 
　　an absolutely magnificent man, although he was obviously gay and 
　　intent on examining only my outfit. Just as I was about to walk 
　　through the doorway that would lead me to the assistants’ suite 
　　outside of Miranda’s office, Emily grabbed my briefcase and tossed 
　　it under her desk. It took only a moment for me to realize that the 
　　message wasCarry that, lose all credibility. And then I was standing 
　　in her office, a wide-open space of huge windows and streaming 
　　bright light. No other details about the space made an impression 
　　that day; I couldn’t take my eyes off of her.

　　Since I’d never seen so much as a picture of Miranda Priestly, I was 
　　shocked to see howskinny she was. The hand she held out was 
　　small-boned, feminine, soft. She had to turn her head upward to look 
　　me in the eye, although she did not stand to greet me. Her expertly 
　　dyed blond hair was pulled back in a chic knot, deliberately loose 
　　enough to look casual but still supremely neat, and while she did 
　　not smile, she did not appear particularly intimidating. She seemed 
　　rather gentle and somewhat shrunken behind her ominous black desk, 
　　and although she did not invite me to sit, I felt comfortable enough 
　　to claim one of the uncomfortable black chairs that faced her. And 
　　it was then I noticed: she was watching me intently, mentally noting 
　　my attempts at grace and propriety with what seemed like amusement. 
　　Condescending and awkward, yes, but not, I decided, particularly 
　　mean-spirited. She spoke first.

　　“What brings you toRunway, Ahn-dre-ah?” she asked in her upper-crust 
　　British accent, never taking her eyes away from mine.

　　“Well, I interviewed with Sharon, and she told me that you’re 
　　looking for an assistant,” I started, my voice a little shaky. When 
　　she nodded, my confidence increased slightly. “And now, after 
　　meeting with Emily, Allison, and Cheryl, I feel like I have a clear 
　　understanding of the kind of person you’re looking for, and I’m 
　　confident I’d be perfect for the job,” I said, remembering Cheryl’s 
　　words. She looked amused for a moment but seemed unfazed.

　　It was at this point that I began to want the job most desperately, 
　　in the way people yearn for things they consider unattainable. It 
　　might not be akin to getting into law school or having an essay 
　　published in a campus journal, but it was, in my starved-for-success 
　　mind, a real challenge―a challenge because I was an imposter, and 
　　not a very good one at that. I had known the minute I stepped on 
　　theRunway floor that I didn’t belong. My clothes and hair were wrong 
　　for sure, but more glaringly out of place was my attitude. I didn’t 
　　know anything about fashion and I didn’tcare . At all. And 
　　therefore, I had to have it. Besides, a million girls would die for 
　　this job.

　　I continued to answer her questions about myself with a 
　　forthrightness and confidence that surprised me. There wasn’t time 
　　to be intimidated. After all, she seemed pleasant enough and I, 
　　amazingly, knew nothing to the contrary. We stumbled a bit when she 
　　inquired about any foreign languages I spoke. When I told her I knew 
　　Hebrew, she paused, pushed her palms flat on her desk and said 
　　icily, “Hebrew? I was hoping for French, or at least something 
　　moreuseful .” I almost apologized, but stopped myself.

　　“Unfortunately, I don’t speak a word of French, but I’m confident it 
　　won’t be a problem.” She clasped her hands back together.

　　“It says here that you studied at Brown?”

　　“Yes, I, uh, I was an English major, concentrating on creative 
　　writing. writing has always been a passion.”So cheesy! I reprimanded 
　　myself.Did I really have to use the word “passion”?

　　“So, does your affinity for writing mean that you’re not 
　　particularly interested in fashion?” She took a sip of sparkling 
　　liquid from a glass and set it down quietly. One quick glance at the 
　　glass showed that she was the kind of woman who could drink without 
　　leaving one of those disgusting lipstick marks. She would always 
　　have perfectly lined and filled-in lips regardless of the hour.

　　“Oh no, of course not. I adore fashion,” I lied rather smoothly. 
　　“I’m looking forward to learning even more about it, since I think 
　　it would be wonderful to write about fashion one day.” Where the 
　　hell had I come up with that one? This was becoming an out-of-body 
　　experience.

　　Things progressed with the same relative ease until she asked her 
　　final question: Which magazines did I read regularly? I leaned 
　　forward eagerly and began to speak: “Well, I only subscribe toThe 
　　New Yorker andNewsweek, but I regularly readThe Buzz . 
　　SometimesTime, but it’s dry, andU.S. News is way too conservative. 
　　Of course, as a guilty pleasure, I’ll skimChic, and since I just 
　　returned from traveling, I read all of the travel magazines and . . 
　　.”

　　“And do you readRunway, Ahn-dre-ah?” she interrupted, leaning over 
　　the desk and peering at me even more intently than before.

　　It had come so quickly, so unexpectedly, that for the first time 
　　that day I was caught off-guard. I didn’t lie, and I didn’t 
　　elaborate or even attempt to explain.

　　“No.”

　　After perhaps ten seconds of stony silence, she beckoned for Emily 
　　to escort me out. I knew I had the job.


　　3

　　“It sure doesn’t sound like you have the job,” Alex, my boyfriend, 
　　said softly, playing with my hair as I rested my throbbing head in 
　　his lap after the grueling day. I’d gone straight from the interview 
　　to his apartment in Brooklyn, not wanting to sleep on Lily’s couch 
　　for another night and needing to tell him about everything that had 
　　just happened. I’d thought about staying there all the time, but I 
　　didn’t want Alex to feel suffocated. “I don’t even know why you’d 
　　want it.” After a moment or two, he reconsidered. “Actually, it does 
　　sound like a pretty phenomenal opportunity. I mean, if this girl 
　　Allison started out as Miranda’s assistant and is now an editor at 
　　the magazine, well, that’d be good enough for me. Just go for it.”

　　He was trying so hard to sound really excited for me. We’d been 
　　dating since our junior year at Brown, and I knew every inflection 
　　of his voice, every look, every signal. He’d just started a few 
　　weeks earlier at PS 277 in the Bronx and was so worn down he could 
　　barely speak. Even though his kids were only nine years old, he’d 
　　been disappointed to see how jaded and cynical they already were. He 
　　was disgusted that they all spoke freely about blow jobs, knew ten 
　　different slang words for pot, and loved to brag about the stuff 
　　they stole or whose cousin was currently residing in a tougher jail. 
　　“Prison connoisseurs,” Alex had taken to calling them. “They could 
　　write a book on the subtle advantages of Sing Sing over Rikers, but 
　　they can’t read a word of the English language.” He was trying to 
　　figure out how he could make a difference.

　　I slid my hand under his T-shirt and started to scratch his back. 
　　Poor thing looked so miserable that I felt guilty bothering him with 
　　the details of the interview, but I just had to talk about it with 
　　someone. “I know. I understand that there wouldn’t be anything 
　　editorial about the job whatsoever, but I’m sure I’ll be able to do 
　　some writing after a few months,” I said. “You don’t think it’s 
　　completely selling out to work at afashion magazine, do you?”

　　He squeezed my arm and lay down next to me. “Baby, you’re a 
　　brilliant, wonderful writer, and I know you’ll be fantastic 
　　anywhere. And of course it’s not selling out. It’s paying your dues. 
　　You’re saying that if you put in a year atRunway you’ll save 
　　yourself three more years of bullshit assistant work somewhere 
　　else?”

　　I nodded. “That’s what Emily and Allison said, that it was an 
　　automatic quid pro quo. Work a year for Miranda and don’t get fired, 
　　and she’ll make a call and get you a job anywhere you want.”

　　“Then how could you not? Seriously, Andy, you’ll work your year and 
　　you’ll get a job atThe New Yorker . It’s what you’ve always wanted! 
　　And it sure sounds like you’ll get there a whole lot faster doing 
　　this than anything else.”

　　“You’re right, you’re totally right.”

　　“And besides, it would guarantee that you’re moving to New York, 
　　which, I have to say, is very appealing to me right now.” He kissed 
　　me, one of those long, lazy kisses it seemed we had personally 
　　invented. “But stop worrying so much. Like you said yourself, you’re 
　　still not sure you have the job. Let’s wait and see.”

　　We cooked a simple dinner and fell asleep watching Letterman. I was 
　　dreaming about obnoxious little nine-year-olds having sex on the 
　　playground while they swigged forties of Olde English and screamed 
　　at my sweet, loving boyfriend when the phone rang.

　　Alex picked it up and pressed it to his ear but didn’t bother to 
　　open his eyes or say hello. He quickly dropped it next to me. I 
　　wasn’t sure I could muster the energy to pick it up.

　　“Hello?” I mumbled, glancing at the clock and seeing that it was 
　　7:15A .M. Who the hell would call at such an hour?

　　“It’s me,” barked a very angry-sounding Lily.

　　“Hi, is everything OK?”

　　“Do you think I’d be calling you if everything was OK? I’m so 
　　hungover I could die, and I finally stop puking long enough to fall 
　　asleep, and I’m awakened by a scarily perky woman who says she works 
　　in HR at Elias-Clark. And she’s looking for you. Atseven-fifteen in 
　　the freakin’ morning. So call her back. And tell her to lose my 
　　number.”

　　“Sorry, Lil. I gave them your number because I don’t have a cell 
　　yet. I can’t believe she called so early! I wonder if that’s good or 
　　bad?” I took the portable and crept out of the bedroom, quietly 
　　closing the door as I went.

　　“Whatev. Good luck. Let me know how it goes. Just not in the next 
　　couple hours, OK?”

　　“Will do. Thanks. And sorry.”

　　I looked at my watch again and couldn’t believe I was about to have 
　　a Business conversation. I put on a pot of Coffee and waited until 
　　it had finished brewing and brought a cup to the couch. It was time 
　　to call. I had no choice.

　　“Hello, this is Andrea Sachs,” I said firmly, although my voice 
　　betrayed me with its deep, raspy, just-woke-up-ness.

　　“Andrea, good morning! Hope I didn’t call too early,” Sharon sang, 
　　her own voice full of sunshine. “I’m sure I didn’t, my dear, 
　　especially since you’ll have to be an early bird soon enough! I have 
　　some very good news. Miranda was very impressed with you and said 
　　she’s very much looking forward to working with you. Isn’t that 
　　wonderful? Congratulations, dear. How does it feel to be Miranda 
　　Priestly’s new assistant? I imagine that you’re just―”

　　My head was spinning. I tried to pull myself off the couch to get 
　　some more Coffee, water, anything that might clear my head and turn 
　　her words back into English, but I only sank further into the 
　　cushions. Was she asking me if I would like the job? Or was she 
　　making an official offer? I couldn’t make sense of anything she’d 
　　just said, anything other than the fact that Miranda Priestly had 
　　liked me.

　　“―delighted with this news. Who wouldn’t be, right? So let’s see, 
　　you can start on Monday, right? She’ll actually be on vacation then, 
　　but that’s a great time to start. Give you a little time to get 
　　acquainted with the other girls―oh, they’re all such sweeties!” 
　　Acquainted? What? Starting Monday? Sweetie girls? It was refusing to 
　　make sense in my addled brain. I picked a single phrase that I’d 
　　understood and responded to it.

　　“Um, well, I don’t think I can start Monday,” I said quietly, hoping 
　　I’d indeed said something coherent. Saying those words had shocked 
　　me into semiwakefulness. I’d walked through the Elias-Clark doors 
　　for the very first time the day before, and was being awakened from 
　　a deep sleep to listen to someone tell me that I was to begin work 
　　in three days. It was Friday―at seven o’clock in the goddamn 
　　morning―and they wanted me to start on Monday? It began to feel like 
　　everything was spiraling out of control. Why the ridiculous rush? 
　　Was this woman so important that she needed me so badly? And why 
　　exactly did Sharon herself sound so scared of Miranda?

　　Starting Monday would be impossible. I had nowhere to live. Home 
　　base was my parents’ house in Avon, the place I’d grudgingly moved 
　　back to after graduation, and where most of my things remained while 
　　I’d traveled during the summer. All of my interview-related clothes 
　　were piled on Lily’s couch. I’d been trying to do the dishes and 
　　empty her ashtrays and buy pints of H&auml;agen-Dazs so she wouldn’t hate 
　　me, but I thought it only fair to give her a much-needed break from 
　　my unending presence, so I camped out on weekends at Alex’s. That 
　　put all of my weekend going-out clothes and fun makeup at Alex’s in 
　　Brooklyn, my laptop and mismatched suits at Lily’s Harlem studio, 
　　and the rest of my life at my parents’ house in Avon. I had no 
　　apartment in New York and didn’t particularly understand how 
　　everyone knew that Madison Avenue ran uptown but Broadway ran down. 
　　I didn’t actually know what uptown was. And she wanted me to start 
　　Monday?

　　“Um, well, I don’t think I can do this Monday because I don’t 
　　currently live in New York,” I quickly explained, clutching the 
　　phone, “and I’ll need a couple days to find an apartment and buy 
　　some furniture and move.”

　　“Oh, well, then. I suppose Wednesday would be OK,” she sniffed.

　　After a few more minutes of haggling, we finally settled on November 
　　17, a week from Monday. That left me a little more than eight days 
　　to find and furnish a Home in one of the craziest real estate 
　　markets in the world.

　　I hung up and flopped back down on the couch. My hands were 
　　trembling, and I let the phone drop to the floor. A week. I had a 
　　week to start working at the job I’d just accepted as Miranda 
　　Priestly’s assistant. But, wait! That’s what was bothering me . . . 
　　I hadn’t actually accepted the job because it hadn’t even been 
　　officially offered. Sharon hadn’t even had to utter the words “We’d 
　　like to make you an offer,” since she took it for granted that 
　　anyone with some semblance of intelligence would obviously just 
　　accept. No one had so much as mentioned the word “salary.” I almost 
　　laughed out loud. Was this some sort of war tactic they’d perfected? 
　　Wait until the victim was finally deep into REM sleep after an 
　　extremely stressful day and then throw some life-altering news at 
　　her? Or had she just assumed that it would be wasted time and breath 
　　to do something as mundane as make a job offer and wait for 
　　acceptance, considering that this wasRunway magazine? Sharon had 
　　just assumed that of course I’d jump all over the chance, that I’d 
　　be thrilled with the opportunity. And, as they always were at 
　　Elias-Clark, she was right. It had all happened so fast, so 
　　frenetically, that I hadn’t had time to debate and deliberate as 
　　usual. But I had a good feeling that thiswas an opportunity I’d be 
　　crazy to turn down, that this could actually be a great first step 
　　to getting toThe New Yorker . I had to try it. I was lucky to have 
　　it.

　　Newly energized, I gulped the rest of my Coffee, brewed another cup 
　　for Alex, and took a quick, hot shower. When I went back into his 
　　room, he was just sitting up.

　　“You’re dressed already?” he asked, fumbling for the tiny 
　　wire-rimmed glasses he was blind without. “Did someone call this 
　　morning, or did I dream that?”

　　“Not a dream,” I said, crawling back under the covers even though I 
　　was wearing jeans and a turtleneck sweater. I was careful not to let 
　　my wet hair soak his pillows. “That was Lily. The HR woman from 
　　Elias-Clark called her place because that’s the number I gave them. 
　　And guess what?”

　　“You got the job?”

　　“I got the job!”

　　“Oh, come here!” he said, sitting up and hugging me. “I’m so proud 
　　of you! That’s great news, it really is.”

　　“So you really think it’s a good opportunity? I know we talked about 
　　it, but they didn’t even give me a chance to decide. She just 
　　assumed that I’d want the job.”

　　“It’s an amazing opportunity. fashion isn’t the worst thing on 
　　earth―maybe it’ll even be interesting.”

　　I rolled my eyes.

　　“OK, so maybe that’s going a little far. But withRunway on your 
　　résumé and a letter from this Miranda woman, and maybe even a few 
　　clips by the time you’re done, hell, you can do anything.The New 
　　Yorker will be beating down your door.”

　　“I hope you’re right, I really do.” I jumped up and starting 
　　throwing my things in my backpack. “Is it still OK if I borrow your 
　　car? The sooner I get Home, the sooner I can get back. Not that it 
　　really matters, because I’mmoving to New York . It’s official!”

　　Since Alex went home to Westchester twice a week to babysit his 
　　little brother when his mom had to work late, his mom had given him 
　　her old car to keep in the city. But he wouldn’t be needing it until 
　　Tuesday, and I’d be back before then. I had been planning to go Home 
　　that weekend anyway, and now I’d have some good news to bring with 
　　me.

　　“Sure. No problem. It’s in a spot about a half-block down on Grand 
　　Street. The keys are on the kitchen table. Call me when you get 
　　there, OK?”

　　“Will do. Sure you don’t want to come? There’ll be great food―you 
　　know my mom orders in only the best.”

　　“Sounds tempting. You know I would, but I organized some of the 
　　younger teachers to get together tomorrow night for happy hour. 
　　Thought it might help us all work as a team. I really can’t miss 
　　it.”

　　“Goddamn do-gooder. Always doing good, spreading good cheer wherever 
　　you go. I’d hate you if I didn’t love you so much.” I leaned over 
　　and kissed him good-bye.

　　I found his little green Jetta on the first try and only spent 
　　twenty minutes trying to find the parkway that would take me to 95 
　　North, which was wide open. It was a freezing day for November; the 
　　temperature was in the midthirties, and there were slick frozen 
　　patches on the back roads. But the sun was out, the kind of winter 
　　glare that causes unaccustomed eyes to tear and squint, and the air 
　　felt clean and cold in my lungs. I rode the entire way with the 
　　window rolled down, listening to the “Almost Famous” soundtrack on 
　　repeat. I worked my damp hair into a ponytail with one hand to keep 
　　it from flying in my eyes, and blew on my hands to keep them warm, 
　　or at least warm enough to grip the steering wheel. Only six months 
　　out of college, and my life was on the verge of bursting forward. 
　　Miranda Priestly, a stranger until yesterday but a powerful woman 
　　indeed, had handpicked me to join her magazine. Now I had a concrete 
　　reason to leave Connecticut and move―all on my own, as a real adult 
　　would―to Manhattan and make it my Home. As I pulled into the 
　　driveway of my childhood house, sheer exhilaration took over. My 
　　cheeks looked red and windburned in the rearview mirror, and my hair 
　　was flying wildly about. There was no makeup on my face, and my 
　　jeans were dirty around the bottom from trudging through the city 
　　slush. But at that moment, I felt beautiful. Natural and cold and 
　　clean and crisp, I threw open the front door and called out for my 
　　mother. It was the last time in my life I remember feeling so light.

　　“A week? Honey, I just don’t see how you’re going to start work in a 
　　week,” my mother said, stirring her tea with a spoon. We were 
　　sitting at the kitchen table in our usual spots, my mother drinking 
　　her usual decaf tea with Sweet’N Low, me with my usual mug of 
　　English Breakfast and sugar. Even though I hadn’t lived at Home in 
　　four years, all it took was an oversize mug of microwaved tea and a 
　　couple Reese’s peanut butter cups to make me feel like I’d never 
　　left.

　　“Well, I don’t have a choice, and, honestly, I’m lucky to have that. 
　　You should’ve heard how hard-core this woman was on the phone,” I 
　　said. She looked at me, expressionless. “But, whatever, I can’t 
　　worry about it. I did just get a job at a really famous magazine 
　　with one of the most powerful women in the industry. A job a million 
　　girls would die for.”

　　We smiled at each other, but her smile was tinged with sadness. “I’m 
　　so happy for you,” she said. “Such a beautiful, grown-up daughter I 
　　have. Honey, I just know this is going to be the start of a 
　　wonderful, wonderful time in your life. Ah, I remember graduating 
　　from college and moving to New York. All alone in that big, crazy 
　　city. Scary but so, so exciting. I want you to love every minute of 
　　it, all the plays and films and people and shopping and books. It’s 
　　going to be the best time of your life―I just know it.” She rested 
　　her hand on mine, something she didn’t usually do. “I’m so proud of 
　　you.”

　　“Thanks, Mom. Does that mean you’re proud enough of me to buy me an 
　　apartment, furniture, and a whole new wardrobe?”

　　“Yeah, right,” she said and smacked the top of my head with a 
　　magazine on her way to the microwave to heat two more cups. She 
　　hadn’t said no, but she wasn’t exactly grabbing her checkbook, 
　　either.

　　I spent the rest of the evening e-mailing everyone I knew, asking if 
　　anyone needed a roommate or knew of someone who did. I posted some 
　　messages online and called people I hadn’t spoken to in months. No 
　　luck. I decided my only choice―without permanently moving onto 
　　Lily’s couch and inevitably wrecking our friendship, or crashing at 
　　Alex’s, which neither of us was ready for―was to sublet a room 
　　short-term, until I could get my bearings in the city. It would be 
　　best to find my own room somewhere, and preferably one that was 
　　already furnished so I wouldn’t have to deal with that, too.

　　The phone rang at a little after midnight, and I lunged for it, 
　　nearly falling off my twin-size childhood bed in the process. A 
　　framed, signed picture of Chris Evert, my childhood hero, smiled 
　　down from my wall, just below a bulletin board that still had 
　　magazine cutouts of Kirk Cameron plastered across it. I smiled into 
　　the phone.

　　“Hey, champ, it’s Alex,” he said with that tone of voice that meant 
　　something had happened. It was impossible to tell if it was 
　　something good or bad. “I just got an e-mail that a girl, Claire 
　　McMillan, is looking for a roommate. Princeton girl. I’ve met her 
　　before, I think. dating Andrew, totally normal. You interested?”

　　“Sure, why not? Do you have her number?”

　　“No, I only have her e-mail, but I’ll forward you her message and 
　　you can get in touch with her. I think she’ll be good.”

　　I e-mailed Claire while I finished talking to Alex and then finally 
　　got some sleep in my own bed. Maybe, just maybe, this would work 
　　out.

　　Claire McMillan: not so much. Her apartment was dark and depressing 
　　and in the middle of Hell’s Kitchen, and there was a junkie propped 
　　up on the doorstep when I arrived. The others weren’t much better. 
　　There was a couple looking to rent out an extra room in their 
　　apartment who made indirect references to putting up with their 
　　constant and loud lovemaking; an artist in her early thirties with 
　　four cats and a fervent desire for more; a bedroom at the end of a 
　　long, dark hallway, with no windows or closets; a twenty-year-old 
　　gay guy in his self-proclaimed “slutty stage.” Each and every 
　　miserable room I’d visited was going for well over $1,000 and my 
　　salary was cashing in at a whopping $32,500. And although math had 
　　never been my strong suit, it didn’t take a genius to figure out 
　　that rent would eat up more than $12,000 of it and taxes would take 
　　the rest. Oh, and my parents were confiscating the emergencies-only 
　　credit card, now that I was an “adult.” Sweet.

　　Lily pulled through after three straight days of letdowns. Since she 
　　had a vested interest in getting me off her couch for good, she 
　　e-mailed everyone she knew. A classmate from her Ph.D. program at 
　　Columbia had a friend who had a boss who knew two girls who were 
　　looking for a roommate. I called immediately and spoke to a very 
　　nice girl named Shanti, who told me she and her friend Kendra were 
　　looking for someone to move into their Upper East Side apartment, in 
　　a room that was miniscule but had a window, a closet, and even an 
　　exposed brick wall. For $800 a month. I asked if the apartment had a 
　　bathroom and kitchen. It did (no dishwasher or bathtub or elevator, 
　　of course, but one can hardly expect living in luxury their first 
　　time out). Bingo. Shanti and Kendra ended up being two very sweet 
　　and quiet Indian girls who’d just graduated from Duke, worked 
　　hellishly long hours at investment banks, and seemed to me, that 
　　first day and every day thereafter, utterly indistinguishable from 
　　each other. I had found a Home.


　　4

　　I’d slept in my new room for three nights already and still felt 
　　like a stranger living in a very strange place. The room was minute. 
　　Perhaps slightly larger than the storage shed in the backyard of my 
　　house in Avon, but not really. And unlike most empty spaces that 
　　actually looked bigger with furniture, my room had shrunk to half 
　　its size. I had naively eyed the tiny square and decided that it had 
　　to be close to a normal-size room and that I’d just buy the usual 
　　bedroom set: a queen-size bed, a dresser, maybe a nightstand or two. 
　　Lily and I had taken Alex’s car to Ikea, the postcollege apartment 
　　mecca, and picked out a beautiful light-colored wood set and a woven 
　　rug with shades of light blue, dark blue, royal blue, and indigo. 
　　Again, like fashion, Home decorating was not my strong suit: I 
　　believe that Ikea was into its “Blue Period.” We bought a duvet 
　　cover with a blue-flecked pattern and the fluffiest comforter they 
　　sold. She persuaded me to get one of those Chinese rice-paper lamps 
　　for the nightstand, and I chose some preframed black-and-white 
　　pictures to complement the deep red roughness of my much-hyped 
　　exposed brick wall. Elegant and casual, and not a little Zen. 
　　Perfect for my first adult room in the big city.

　　Perfect, that is, until it all actually arrived. It seems simply 
　　eyeing a room isn’t quite the same as measuring it. Nothing fit. 
　　Alex put the bed together and by the time he’d pushed it against the 
　　exposed-brick wall (Manhattan code for “unfinished wall”) it had 
　　consumed the entire room. I had to send the delivery men back with 
　　the six-drawer dresser, the two adorable nightstands, and even the 
　　full-length mirror. The men and Alex did lift up the bed, however, 
　　and I was able to slip the tri-blue rug under it, and a few blue 
　　inches peeked out from underneath the wooden behemoth. The 
　　rice-paper lamp had no nightstand or dresser on which to rest, so I 
　　simply placed it on the floor, wedged in the six inches between the 
　　bed frame and the sliding closet door. And even though I tried 
　　special mounting tape, nails, duct tape, screws, wires, Krazy Glue, 
　　double-sided tape, and much cursing, the framed photos refused to 
　　adhere to the exposed brick wall. After nearly three hours of effort 
　　and knuckles rubbed bleeding and raw from the brick, I finally 
　　propped them up on the windowsill. It was for the best, I thought. 
　　Blocked a bit of the direct view the woman living across the 
　　airshaft had into my room. None of it mattered, though. Not the 
　　airshaft instead of a majestic skyline or the lack of drawer space 
　　or the closet that was too small to hold a winter coat. The room was 
　　mine―the first I could decorate all on my own, with no input from 
　　parents or roommates―and I loved it.

　　It was the Sunday night before my first day of work, and I could do 
　　nothing but agonize over what to wear the next day. Kendra, the 
　　nicer of my two apartmentmates, kept poking her head in and asking 
　　quietly if she could help at all. Considering the two of them wore 
　　ultraconservative suits to work each day, I declined any fashion 
　　input. I paced the living room as much as I could manage when each 
　　length only took four strides, and sat down on the futon in front of 
　　the TV. Just what does one wear to the first day working for the 
　　most fashionable fashion editor of the most fashionable fashion 
　　magazine in existence? I’d heard of Prada (from the few Jappy girls 
　　who carried the backpacks at Brown) and Louis Vuitton (because both 
　　of my grandmothers sported the signature-print bags without 
　　realizing how cool they were) and maybe even Gucci (because who 
　　hasn’t heard of Gucci?). But I sure didn’t own a single stitch of 
　　it, and I wouldn’t have known what to do with it if the entire 
　　contents of all three stores resided in my miniature closet. I 
　　walked back to my room―or, rather, the wall-to-wall mattress that I 
　　called a room―and collapsed on that big, beautiful bed, banging my 
　　ankle on the bulky frame. Shit. What now?

　　After much agonizing and clothes-flinging, I finally decided on a 
　　light blue sweater and a knee-length black skirt, with my knee-high 
　　black boots. I already knew that a briefcase wouldn’t fly there, so 
　　I was left with no choice but to use my black canvas purse. The last 
　　thing I remember about that night was trying to navigate around my 
　　massive bed in high-heeled boots, a skirt, and no shirt, and sitting 
　　down to rest from the exhaustion of the effort.

　　I must have passed out from sheer anxiety, because it was adrenaline 
　　alone that awakened me at 5:30A .M. I bolted from the bed. My nerves 
　　had been in perpetual overdrive all week, and my head felt like it 
　　would explode. I had exactly an hour and a half to shower, dress, 
　　and make my way from my fraternity-like building at 96th and Third 
　　to midtown via public transportation, a still sinister and 
　　intimidating concept. That meant I had to allot an hour for travel 
　　time and a half hour to make myself beautiful.

　　The shower was horrific. It made a high-pitched squealing noise like 
　　one of those dog-training whistles, remaining steadfastly lukewarm 
　　until just before I stepped out into the freezing-cold bathroom, at 
　　which point the water turned scalding. It took a mere three days 
　　ofthat routine before I began sprinting from my bed, turning on the 
　　shower fifteen minutes early, and heading back under the covers. 
　　When I snoozed three more times with the alarm clock and went back 
　　for round two in the bathroom, the mirrors would be all steamed up 
　　from the gloriously hot―although trickling―water.

　　I got myself into my binding and uncomfortable outfit and out the 
　　door in twenty-five minutes―a record. And it took only ten minutes 
　　to find the nearest subway, something I should’ve done the night 
　　before but was too busy scoffing at my mother’s suggestion to take a 
　　“run-through” so I wouldn’t get lost. When I’d gone for the 
　　interview the week before I’d taken a cab, and I was already 
　　convinced that this subway experiment was going to be a nightmare. 
　　But, remarkably, there was an English-speaking attendant in the 
　　booth who instructed me to take the 6 train to 59th Street. She said 
　　I’d exit right on 59th and would have to walk two blocks west to 
　　Madison. Easy. I rode the cold train in silence, one of the only 
　　people crazy enough to be awake and actually moving at such a 
　　miserable hour in the middle of November. So far, so good―no 
　　glitches until it was time to make my way up to street level.

　　I took the nearest stairs and stepped out into a frigid day where 
　　the only light I saw was emanating from twenty-four-hour bodegas. 
　　Behind me was Bloomingdale’s, but nothing else looked familiar. 
　　Elias-Clark, Elias-Clark, Elias-Clark. Where was that building? I 
　　turned in my place 180 degrees until I saw a street sign: 60th 
　　Street and Lexington. Well, 59th can’t be that far away from 60th, 
　　but which way should I walk to make the streets go west? And where 
　　was Madison in comparison to Lexington? Nothing looked familiar from 
　　my visit to the building the week before, since I’d been dropped off 
　　right in front. I strolled for a bit, happy to have left enough time 
　　to get as lost as I was, and finally ducked into a deli for a cup of 
　　Coffee.

　　“Hello, sir. I can’t seem to find my way to the Elias-Clark 
　　building. Could you please point me in the right direction?” I asked 
　　the nervous-looking man behind the cash register. I tried not to 
　　smile sweetly, remembering what everyone had told me about not being 
　　in Avon anymore, and how people here don’t exactly respond well to 
　　good manners. He scowled at me, and I got nervous it was because he 
　　thought me rude. I smiled sweetly.

　　“One dollah,” he said, holding out his hand.

　　“You’re charging me for directions?”

　　“One dollah, skeem or bleck, you peek.”

　　I stared at him for a moment before I realized he knew only enough 
　　English to converse about Coffee. “Oh, skim would be perfect. Thank 
　　you so much.” I handed over a dollar and headed back outside, more 
　　lost than ever. I asked people who worked at newsstands, as street 
　　sweepers, even a man who was tucked inside one of those movable 
　　breakfast carts. Not a single one understood me well enough to so 
　　much as point in the direction of 59th and Madison, and I had brief 
　　flashbacks to Delhi, Depression, dysentery.No! I will find it.

　　A few more minutes of wandering aimlessly around a waking midtown 
　　actually landed me at the front door of the Elias-Clark building. 
　　The lobby glowed behind the glass doors in the early-morning 
　　darkness, and it looked, for those first few moments, like a warm, 
　　welcoming place. But when I pushed the revolving door to enter, it 
　　fought me. Harder and harder I pushed, until my body weight was 
　　thrust forward and my face was nearly pressed against the glass, and 
　　only then did it budge. When it did begin to move, it slid slowly at 
　　first, prompting me to push ever harder. But as soon as it picked up 
　　some momentum, the glass behemoth whipped around, hitting me from 
　　behind and forcing me to trip over my feet and shuffle visibly to 
　　remain standing. A man behind the security desk laughed.

　　“Tricky, eh? Not the first time I seen that happen, and won’t be the 
　　last,” he chortled, fleshy cheeks jiggling. “They getcha good here.”

　　I looked him over quickly and decided to hate him and knew that he 
　　would never like me, regardless of what I said or how I acted. I 
　　smiled anyway.

　　“I’m Andrea,” I said, pulling a knit mitten from my hand and 
　　reaching over the desk. “Today’s my first day of work atRunway . I’m 
　　Miranda Priestly’s new assistant.”

　　“And I’m sorry!” he roared, throwing his round head back with glee. 
　　“Just call me ‘Sorry for You’! Hah! Hah! Hah! Hey, Eduardo, check 
　　this out. She’s one of Miranda’s newslaves ! Where you from, girl, 
　　bein’ all friendly and shit? Topeka fuckin’ Kansas? She is gonna eat 
　　you alive, hah, hah, hah!”

　　But before I could respond, a portly man wearing the same uniform 
　　came over and with no subtlety whatsoever looked me up and down. I 
　　braced for more mocking and guffaws, but it didn’t come. Instead, he 
　　turned a kind face to mine and looked me in the eyes.

　　“I’m Eduardo, and this idiot here’s Mickey,” he said, motioning to 
　　the first man, who looked annoyed that Eduardo had acted civilly and 
　　ruined all the fun. “Don’t make no never mind of him, he’s just 
　　kiddin’ with you.” He spoke with a mixed Spanish and New York 
　　accent, as he picked up a sign-in book. “You just fill out this here 
　　information, and I’ll give you a temporary pass to go upstairs. Tell 
　　’em you need a card wit your pitcher on it from HR.”

　　I must have looked at him gratefully, because he got embarrassed and 
　　shoved the book across the counter. “Well, go on now, fill ’er out. 
　　And good luck today, girl. You gonna need it.”

　　I was too nervous and exhausted at this point to ask him to explain, 
　　and besides, I didn’t really have to. About the only thing I’d had 
　　time to do in the week between accepting the job and starting work 
　　was to learn a little bit about my new boss. I had Googled her and 
　　was surprised to find that Miranda Priestly was born Miriam 
　　Princhek, in London’s East End. Hers was like all the other orthodox 
　　Jewish families in the town, stunningly poor but devout. Her father 
　　occasionally worked odd jobs, but mostly they relied on the 
　　community for support since he spent most of his days studying 
　　Jewish texts. Her mother had died in childbirth with Miriam, and it 
　　washer mother who moved in and helped raise the children. And were 
　　there children! Eleven in all. Most of her brothers and sisters went 
　　on to work blue-collar jobs like their father, with little time to 
　　do anything but pray and work; a couple managed to get themselves 
　　into and through the university, only to marry young and begin 
　　having large families of their own. Miriam was the single exception 
　　to the family tradition.

　　After saving the small bills her older siblings would slip her 
　　whenever they were able, Miriam promptly dropped out of high school 
　　upon turning seventeen―a mere three months shy of graduation―to take 
　　a job as an assistant to an up-and-coming British designer, helping 
　　him put together his shows each season. After a few years of making 
　　a name for herself as one of the darlings of London’s burgeoning 
　　fashion world and studying French at night, she scored a job as a 
　　junior editor at the FrenchChic magazine in Paris. By this time, she 
　　had little to do with her family: they didn’t understand her life or 
　　ambitions, and she was embarrassed by their old-fashioned piety and 
　　overwhelming lack of sophistication. The alienation from her family 
　　was completed shortly after joining FrenchChic when, at twenty-four 
　　years old, Miriam Princhek became Miranda Priestly, shedding her 
　　undeniably ethnic name for one with more panache. Her rough, 
　　cockney-girl British accent was soon replaced by a carefully 
　　cultivated, educated one, and by her late twenties, Miriam’s 
　　transformation from Jewish peasant to secular socialite was 
　　complete. She rose quickly, ruthlessly, through the ranks of the 
　　magazine world.

　　She spent ten years at the helm of FrenchRunway before Elias 
　　transferred her to the number-one spot at AmericanRunway, the 
　　ultimate achievement. She moved her two daughters and her rock-star 
　　then husband (himself eager to gain more exposure in America) to a 
　　penthouse apartment on Fifth Avenue at 76th Street and began a new 
　　era atRunway magazine: the Priestly years, the sixth of which we 
　　were nearing as I began my first day.

　　By some stroke of dumb luck, I would be working for nearly a month 
　　before Miranda was back in the office. She took her vacation every 
　　year starting a week before Thanksgiving until right after New 
　　Year’s. Typically, she’d spend a few weeks at the flat she kept in 
　　London, but this year, I was told, she had dragged her husband and 
　　daughters to Oscar de la Renta’s estate in the Dominican Republic 
　　for two weeks before spending Christmas and New Year’s at the Ritz 
　　in Paris. I’d also been forewarned that even though she was 
　　technically “on vacation,” she’d still be fully reachable and 
　　working at all times, and therefore, so should every single other 
　　person on staff. I was to be appropriately prepped and trained 
　　without her highness present. That way, Miranda wouldn’t have to 
　　suffer my inevitable mistakes while I learned the job. Sounded good 
　　to me. So at 7:00A .M. on the dot, I signed my name into Eduardo’s 
　　book and was buzzed through the turnstiles for the very first time. 
　　“Strike a pose!” Eduardo called after me, just before the elevator 
　　doors swept shut.

　　Emily, looking remarkably haggard and sloppy in a fitted but 
　　wrinkled sheer white T-shirt and hypertrendy cargo pants was waiting 
　　for me in the reception area, clutching a cup of Starbucks and 
　　flipping though the new December issue. Her high heels were placed 
　　firmly on the glass coffee table, and a black lacy bra showed 
　　obviously through the completely transparent cotton of her shirt. 
　　Lipstick, smeared a bit around her mouth by the Coffee cup, and 
　　uncombed, wavy red hair that spilled down over her shoulders made 
　　her look as though she’d spent the last seventy-two hours in bed.

　　“Hey, welcome,” she muttered, giving me my first official up-down 
　　look-over by someone other than the security guard. “Nice boots.”

　　My heart surged. Was she serious? Or sarcastic? Her tone made it 
　　impossible to tell. My arches ached already and my toes were jammed 
　　up against the front, but if I’d actually been complimented on an 
　　item of my outfit by aRunway -er, it might be worth the pain.

　　Emily looked at me a moment longer and then swung her legs off the 
　　table, sighing dramatically. “Well, let’s get to it. It’sreally 
　　lucky for you that she’s not here,” she said. “Not that she’s not 
　　great, of course, because she is,” she added in what I would soon 
　　recognize―and come to adopt myself―as the classicRunway Paranoid 
　　Turnaround. Just when something negative about Miranda slips out 
　　from a Clacker’s lips―however justified―paranoia that Miranda will 
　　find out overwhelms the speaker and inspires an about-face. One of 
　　my favorite workday pastimes became watching my colleagues scramble 
　　to negate whatever blasphemy they’d uttered.

　　Emily slid her card through the electronic reader, and we walked 
　　side by side, in silence, through the winding hallways to the center 
　　of the floor, where Miranda’s office suite was located. I watched as 
　　she opened the suite’s French doors and tossed her bag and coat on 
　　one of the desks that sat directly outside Miranda’s cavernous 
　　office. “This is your desk, obviously,” she motioned to a smooth, 
　　wooden, L-shaped Formica slab that sat directly opposite hers. It 
　　had a brand-new turquoise iMac computer, a phone, and some filing 
　　trays, and there were already pens and paper clips and some 
　　notebooks in the drawers. “I left most of my stuff for you. It’s 
　　easier if I just order the new stuff for myself.”

　　Emily had just been promoted to the position of senior assistant, 
　　leaving the junior assistant position open for me. She explained 
　　that she would spend two years as Miranda’s senior assistant, after 
　　which she’d be skyrocketed to an amazing fashion position atRunway . 
　　The three-year assistant program she’d be completing was the 
　　ultimate guarantee of going places in the fashion world, but I was 
　　clinging to the belief that my one-year sentence would suffice 
　　forThe New Yorker . Allison had already left Miranda’s office area 
　　for her new post in the beauty department, where she’d be 
　　responsible for testing new makeup, moisturizers, and hair products 
　　and writing them up. I wasn’t sure how being Miranda’s assistant had 
　　prepared her for this task, but I was impressed nonetheless. The 
　　promises were true: people who worked for Miranda got places.

　　The rest of the staff began streaming in around ten, about fifty in 
　　all of editorial. The biggest department was fashion, of course, 
　　with close to thirty people, including all the accessories 
　　assistants. Features, beauty, and art rounded out the mix. Nearly 
　　everyone stopped by Miranda’s office to schmooze with Emily, 
　　overhear any gossip concerning her boss, and check out the new girl. 
　　I met dozens of people that first morning, everyone flashing 
　　enormous, toothy white smiles and appearing genuinely interested in 
　　meeting me.

　　The men were all flamboyantly gay, adorning themselves in 
　　second-skin leather pants and ribbed T’s that stretched over bulging 
　　biceps and perfect pecs. The art director, an older man sporting 
　　champagne blond, thinning hair, who looked like he dedicated his 
　　life to emulating Elton John, was turned out in rabbit-fur loafers 
　　and eyeliner. No one batted an eye. We’d had gay groups on campus, 
　　and I had a few friends who’d come out the past few years, but none 
　　of them looked like this. It was like being surrounded by the entire 
　　cast and crew ofRent ―with better costumes, of course.

　　The women, or rather the girls, were individually beautiful. 
　　Collectively, they were mind-blowing. Most appeared to be about 
　　twenty-five, and few looked a day older than thirty. While nearly 
　　all of them had enormous, glimmering diamonds on their ring fingers, 
　　it seemed impossible that any had actually given birth yet―or ever 
　　would. In and out, in and out they walked gracefully on four-inch 
　　skinny heels, sashaying over to my desk to extend milky-white hands 
　　with long, manicured fingers, calling themselves “Jocelyn who works 
　　with Hope,” “Nicole from fashion,” and “Stef who oversees 
　　accessories.” Only one, Shayna, was shorter than five-nine, but she 
　　was so petite it seemed impossible for her to carry another inch of 
　　height. All weighed less than 110 pounds.

　　As I sat in my swivel chair, trying to remember everyone’s name, the 
　　prettiest girl I’d seen all day swooped in. She wore a rose-colored 
　　cashmere sweater that looked like it was spun from pink clouds. The 
　　most amazing, white hair swirled down her back. Her six-one frame 
　　looked as though it carried only enough weight to keep her upright, 
　　but she moved with the surprising grace of a dancer. Her cheeks 
　　glowed, and her multi-carat, flawless diamond engagement ring 
　　emanated an incredible lightness. I thought she’d caught me staring 
　　at it, since she flung her hand under my nose.

　　“I created it,” she announced, smiling at her hand and looking at 
　　me. I looked to Emily for an explanation, a hint as to who this 
　　might be, but she was on the phone again. I thought the girl was 
　　referring to the ring, meant that she had actually designed it, but 
　　then she said, “Isn’t it a gorgeous color? It’s one coat Marshmallow 
　　and one coat Ballet Slipper. Actually, Ballet Slipper came first, 
　　and then a topcoat to finish it off. It’s perfect―light colored 
　　without looking like you painted your nails with White Out. I think 
　　I’ll use this every time I get a manicure!” And she turned on her 
　　heels and walked out.Ah, yes, a pleasure to meet you, too, I 
　　mentally directed toward her back as she strutted away.

　　I’d been enjoying meeting all my coworkers; everyone seemed kind and 
　　sweet and, except for the beautiful weirdo with the nail polish 
　　fetish, they all appeared interested in getting to know me. Emily 
　　hadn’t left my side yet, seizing every opportunity to teach me 
　　something. She provided running commentary on who was really 
　　important, whom not to piss off, whom it was beneficial to befriend 
　　because they threw the best parties. When I described Manicure Girl, 
　　Emily’s face lit up.

　　“Oh!” she breathed, more excited than I’d heard her about anyone 
　　else yet. “Isn’t she just amazing?”

　　“Um, yeah, she seemed nice. We didn’t really get a chance to talk, 
　　she was just, you know, showing me her nail polish.”

　　Emily smiled widely, proudly. “Yes, well, you do know who she is, 
　　don’t you?”

　　I wracked my brain, trying to remember if she looked like any movie 
　　stars or singers or models, but I couldn’t place her. So, she was 
　　famous! Maybe that’s why she hadn’t introduced herself―I was 
　　supposed to recognize her. But I didn’t. “No, actually, I don’t. Is 
　　she famous?”

　　The stare I received in response was part disbelief, part disgust. 
　　“Um,yeah, ” Emily said, emphasizing the “yeah” and squinting her 
　　eyes as if to say,You total fucking idiot . “That is Jessica 
　　Duchamps.” She waited. I waited. Nothing. “You do know who that is, 
　　right?” Again, I ran lists through my mind, trying to connect 
　　something with this new information, but I was quite sure I’d never, 
　　ever heard of her. Besides, this game was getting old.

　　“Emily, I’ve never seen her before, and her name doesn’t sound 
　　familiar. Would you please tell me who she is?” I asked, struggling 
　　to remain calm. The ironic part was that I didn’t even care who she 
　　was, but Emily was clearly not going to give this up until she’d 
　　made me look like a complete and total loser.

　　Her smile this time was patronizing. “Of course. You just had to say 
　　so. Jessica Duchamps is, well, a Duchamps! You know, as in the most 
　　successful French restaurant in the city! Her parents own it―isn’t 
　　that crazy? They are so unbelievably rich.”

　　“Oh, really?” I said, feigning enthusiasm for the fact that this 
　　super-pretty girl was worth knowing because her parents were 
　　restaurateurs. “That’s great.”

　　I answered a few phone calls with the requisite “Miranda Priestly’s 
　　office,” although both Emily and I were worried that Miranda herself 
　　would call and I wouldn’t know what to do. Panic set in during a 
　　call when an unidentified woman barked something incoherent in a 
　　strong British accent, and I threw the phone to Emily without 
　　thinking to put it on hold first.

　　“It’s her,” I whispered urgently. “Take it.”

　　Emily gave me my first viewing of her specialty look. Never one to 
　　mince emotions, she could raise her eyebrows and drop her chin in a 
　　way that clearly conveyed equal parts disgust and pity.

　　“Miranda? It’s Emily,” she said, a bright smile lighting up her face 
　　as if Miranda might be able to seep through the phone and see her. 
　　Silence. A frown. “Oh, Mimi, so sorry! The new girl thought you were 
　　Miranda! I know, how funny. I guess we have to work onnot thinking 
　　every British accent is necessarily our boss! ” She looked at me 
　　pointedly, her overtweezed eyebrows arching even higher.

　　She chatted a bit longer while I continued to answer the phone and 
　　take messages for Emily, who would then call the people back―with 
　　nonstop narration on their order of importance, if any, in Miranda’s 
　　life. About noon, just as the first hunger pangs were beginning, I 
　　picked up a call and heard a British accent on the other end.

　　“Hello? Allison, is that you?” asked the icy-sounding but regal 
　　voice. “I’ll be needing a skirt.”

　　I cupped my hand over the receiver and felt my eyes open wide. 
　　“Emily, it’s her, it’s definitely her,” I hissed, waving the 
　　receiver to get her attention. “She wants a skirt!”

　　Emily turned to see my panic-stricken face and promptly hung up the 
　　phone without so much as “I’ll call you later” or even “good-bye.” 
　　She pressed the button to switch Miranda to her line, and plastered 
　　on another wide grin.

　　“Miranda? It’s Emily. What can I do?” She put her pen to her pad and 
　　began writing furiously, forehead furrowing intently. “Yes, of 
　　course. Naturally.” And as fast as it happened, it was over. I 
　　looked at her expectantly. She rolled her eyes at me for appearing 
　　so eager.

　　“Well, it looks like you have your first job. Miranda needs a skirt 
　　for tomorrow, among other things, so we’ll need to get it on a plane 
　　by tonight, at the latest.”

　　“OK, well, what kind does she need?” I asked, still reeling from the 
　　shock that a skirt would be traveling to the Dominican Republic 
　　simply because she’d requested it do so.

　　“She didn’t say exactly,” Emily muttered as she picked up the phone.

　　“Hi, Jocelyn, it’s me. She wants a skirt, and I’ll need to have it 
　　on Mrs. de la Renta’s flight tonight, since she’ll be meeting 
　　Miranda down there. No, I have no idea. No, she didn’t say. I really 
　　don’t know. OK, thanks.” She turned to me and said, “It makes it 
　　more difficult when she’s not specific. She’s too busy to worry 
　　about details like that, so she didn’t say what material or color or 
　　style or brand she wants. But that’s OK. I know her size, and I 
　　definitely know her taste well enough to predict exactly what she’ll 
　　like. That was Jocelyn from the fashion department. They’ll start 
　　calling some in.” I pictured Jerry Lewis presiding over a skirt 
　　telethon with a giant scoreboard, drum role, and voilà! Gucci and 
　　spontaneous applause.

　　Not quite. “Calling in” the skirts was my very first lesson inRunway 
　　ridiculousness, although I do have to say that the process was as 
　　efficient as a military operation. Either Emily or myself would 
　　notify the fashion assistants―about eight in all, who each 
　　maintained contacts within a specified list of designers and stores. 
　　The assistants would immediately begin calling all of their public 
　　relations contacts at the various design houses and, if appropriate, 
　　at upscale Manhattan stores and tell them that Miranda Priestly―yes, 
　　Miranda Priestly, and yes, it was indeed for herpersonal use―was 
　　looking for a particular item. Within minutes, every PR account exec 
　　and assistant working at Michael Kors, Gucci, Prada, Versace, Fendi, 
　　Armani, Chanel, Barney’s, Chloé, Calvin Klein, Bergdorf, Roberto 
　　Cavalli, and Saks would be messengering over (or, in some cases, 
　　hand-delivering) every skirt they had in stock that Miranda Priestly 
　　could conceivably find attractive. I watched the process unfold like 
　　a highly choreographed ballet, each player knowing exactly where and 
　　when and how their next step would occur. While this near-daily 
　　activity unfolded, Emily sent me to pick up a few other things that 
　　we’d need to send with the skirt that night.

　　“Your car will be waiting for you on Fifty-eighth Street,” she said 
　　while working two phone lines and scribbling instructions for me on 
　　a piece ofRunway stationery. She paused briefly to toss me a Cell 
　　Phone and said, “Here, take this in case I need to reach you or you 
　　have any questions. Never turn it off. Always answer it.” I took the 
　　phone and the paper and headed down to the 58th Street side of the 
　　building, wondering how I was ever going to find “my car.” Or even, 
　　really, what that meant. I had barely stepped on the sidewalk and 
　　looked meekly around before a squat, gray-haired man gumming a pipe 
　　approached.

　　“You Priestly’s new girl?” he croaked through tobacco-stained lips, 
　　never removing the mahogany-colored pipe. I nodded. “I’m Rich. The 
　　dispatcher. You wanna car, you talka to me. Got it, blondie?” I 
　　nodded again and ducked into the backseat of a black Cadillac sedan. 
　　He slammed the door shut and waved.

　　“Where you going, miss?” the driver asked, pulling me back to the 
　　present. I realized I had no idea and pulled the piece of paper from 
　　my pocket.

　　First stop: Tommy Hilfiger’s studio at 355 West 57th St., 6th Floor. 
　　Ask for Leanne. She’ll give you everything we need.

　　I gave the driver the address and stared out the window. It was one 
　　o’clock on a frigid winter afternoon, I was twenty-three years old, 
　　and I was riding in the backseat of a chauffeured sedan, on my way 
　　to Tommy Hilfiger’s studio. And I was positively starving. It took 
　　nearly forty-five minutes to go the fifteen blocks during the 
　　midtown lunch hour, my first glimpse of real city gridlock. The 
　　driver told me he’d circle the block until I came out again, and off 
　　I went to Tommy’s studio. When I asked for Leanne at the 
　　receptionist’s desk on the sixth floor, an adorable girl not a day 
　　older than eighteen came bounding down the stairs.

　　“Hi!” she called, stretching out the “I” sound for a few seconds. 
　　“You must be Andrea, Miranda’s new assistant. We sure do love her 
　　around here, so welcome to the team!” She grinned. I grinned. She 
　　pulled a massive plastic bag out from underneath a table and 
　　immediately spilled its contents on the floor. “Here we have 
　　Caroline’s favorite jeans in three colors, and we threw in some baby 
　　T’s, too. And Cassidy just adores Tommy’s khaki skirts―we gave them 
　　to her in olive and stone.” Jean skirts, denim jackets, even a few 
　　pair of socks came flying out of the bag, and all I could do was 
　　stare: there were enough clothes to constitute four or more total 
　　preteen wardrobes.Who the hell are Cassidy and Caroline? I wondered, 
　　staring at the loot. What self-respecting person wears Tommy 
　　Hilfiger jeans―in three different colors, no less?

　　I must’ve looked thoroughly confused, because Leanne quite purposely 
　　turned her back while repacking the clothes and said, “I just know 
　　Miranda’s daughters will love this stuff. We’ve been dressing them 
　　for years, and Tommy insists on picking the clothes out for them 
　　himself.” I shot her a grateful look and threw the bag over my 
　　shoulder.

　　“Good luck!” she called as the elevator doors closed, a genuine 
　　smile taking up most of her face. “You’re lucky to have such an 
　　awesome job!” Before she could say it, I found myself mentally 
　　finishing the sentence―a million girls would die for it.And for that 
　　moment, having just seen a famous designer’s studio and in 
　　possession of thousands of dollars worth of clothes, I thought she 
　　was right.

　　Once I got the hang of things, the rest of the day flew. I debated 
　　for a few minutes whether anyone would be mad if I took a minute to 
　　pick up a sandwich, but I had no choice. I hadn’t eaten anything 
　　since my croissant at seven this morning, and it was nearly two. I 
　　asked the driver to pull over at a deli and decided at the last 
　　minute to get him one, too. His jaw dropped when I handed him the 
　　turkey and honey mustard, and I wondered if I had made him 
　　uncomfortable.

　　“I just figured you were hungry, too,” I said. “You know, driving 
　　around all day, you probably don’t have much time for lunch.”

　　“Thank you, miss, I appreciate it. It’s just that I’ve been driving 
　　around Elias-Clark girls for twelve years, and they are not so nice. 
　　You are very nice,” he said in a thick but indeterminate accent, 
　　looking at me in the rearview mirror. I smiled at him and felt a 
　　momentary flash of foreboding. But then the moment passed and we 
　　each munched our turkey wraps while sitting in gridlock and 
　　listening to his favorite CD, which sounded to me like little more 
　　than a woman shrieking the same thing over and over in an unknown 
　　language, the whole thing set to sitar music.

　　Emily’s next written instruction was to pick up a pair of white 
　　shorts that Miranda desperately needed for tennis. I figured we’d be 
　　headed to Polo, but she had written Chanel. Chanel made white tennis 
　　shorts? The driver took me to the private salon, where an older 
　　saleswoman whose facelift had left her eyes looking like slits 
　　handed me a pair of white cotton-Lycra hot pants, size zero, pinned 
　　to a silk hanger and draped in a velvet garment bag. I looked at the 
　　shorts, which appeared as though they wouldn’t fit a six-year-old, 
　　and looked back to the woman.

　　“Um, do you really think Miranda will wear these?” I asked 
　　tentatively, convinced the woman could open that pit-bull mouth of 
　　hers and consume me whole. She glared at me.

　　“Well, I should hope so, miss, considering they’re custom measured 
　　and cut, according to her exact specifications,” she snarled as she 
　　handed the minishorts over. “Tell her Mr. Kopelman sends his 
　　best.”Sure, lady. Whoever that is.

　　My next stop was what Emily wrote as “way downtown,” J&R Computer 
　　World near City Hall. Seemed it was the only store in the entire 
　　city that sold Warriors of the West, a computer game that Miranda 
　　wanted to purchase for Oscar and Annette de la Renta’s son, Moises. 
　　By the time I made it downtown an hour later, I’d realized that the 
　　Cell Phone could make long-distance calls, and I was happily dialing 
　　my parents and telling them how great the job was.

　　“Um, Dad? Hi, it’s Andy. Guess where I am now? Yes, of course I’m at 
　　work, but that happens to be in the backseat of a chauffeured car 
　　cruising around Manhattan. I’ve already been to Tommy Hilfiger and 
　　Chanel, and after I buy this computer game, I’m on my way to Oscar 
　　de la Renta’s apartment on Park Avenue to drop all the stuff off. 
　　No, it’s not for him! Miranda’s in the DR and Annette’s flying there 
　　to meet them all tonight. On a private plane, yes! Dad! It stands 
　　for the Dominican Republic, of course!”

　　He sounded wary but pleased that I was so happy, and I came to 
　　decide that I was hired as college-educated messenger. Which was 
　　absolutely fine with me. After leaving the bag of Tommy clothes, the 
　　hot pants, and the computer game with a very distinguished-looking 
　　doorman in a very plush Park Avenue lobby (so this is what people 
　　mean when they talk about Park Avenue!), I headed back to the 
　　Elias-Clark building. When I walked into my office area, Emily was 
　　sitting Indian-style on the floor, wrapping presents in plain white 
　　paper with white ribbons. She was surrounded by mountains of 
　　red-and-white boxes, all identical in shape, hundreds, perhaps 
　　thousands, scattered between our desks and overflowing into 
　　Miranda’s office. Emily was unaware that I was watching her, and I 
　　saw that it took her only two minutes to wrap each individual box 
　　perfectly and an additional fifteen seconds to tie on a white satin 
　　ribbon. She moved efficiently, not wasting a single second, piling 
　　the wrapped white boxes in new mountains behind her. The wrapped 
　　pile grew and grew, but the unwrapped pile didn’t shrink. I 
　　estimated that she could be at it for the next four days and still 
　　not finish.

　　I called her name over the eighties CD she had playing from her 
　　computer. “Um, Emily? Hi, I’m back.”

　　She turned toward me and for a brief moment appeared to have no idea 
　　who I was. Completely blank. But then my new-girl status came 
　　rushing back. “How’d it go?” she asked quickly. “Did you get 
　　everything on the list?”

　　I nodded.

　　“Even the video game? When I called, there was only one copy left. 
　　It was there?”

　　I nodded again.

　　“And you gave it all to the de la Rentas’ doorman on Park? The 
　　clothes, the shorts, everything?”

　　“Yep. No problem. It went very smoothly, and I dropped it all off a 
　　few minutes ago. I was wondering, will Miranda actually wear those―”

　　“Listen, I need to run to the bathroom and I’ve been waiting for you 
　　to get back. Just sit by the phone for a minute, OK?”

　　“You haven’t gone to the bathroom since I left?” I asked 
　　incredulously. It had been five hours. “Why not?”

　　Emily finished tying the ribbon on the box she had just wrapped and 
　　looked at me coolly. “Miranda doesn’t tolerate anyone except her 
　　assistants answering her phone, so since you weren’t here, I didn’t 
　　want to go. I suppose I could have run out for a minute, but I know 
　　she’s having a hectic day, and I want to make sure that I’m always 
　　available to her. So no, we do not go to the bathroom―or anywhere 
　　else―without clearing it with each other. We need to work together 
　　to make sure that we are doing the best job possible for her. OK?”

　　“Sure,” I said. “Go ahead. I’ll be right here.” She turned and 
　　walked away, and I put my hand on the desk to steady myself. No 
　　going to the bathroom without a coordinated war plan? Did she really 
　　sit in that office for the past five hours willing her bladder to 
　　behave because she worried that a woman across the Atlantic may call 
　　in the two and a half minutes it would take to run to the ladies’ 
　　room? Apparently so. It seemed a little dramatic, but I assumed that 
　　was just Emily being overly enthusiastic. There was no way that 
　　Miranda actually demanded that of her assistants. I was sure of it. 
　　Or did she?

　　I picked up a few sheets of paper from the printer and saw that it 
　　was titled “X-Mas Presents Received.” One, two, three, four, 
　　five,six single-spaced pages of gifts, with sender and item on one 
　　line each. Two hundred and fifty-six presents in all. It looked like 
　　a wedding registry for the Queen of England, and I couldn’t take it 
　　in fast enough. There was a Bobby Brown makeup set from Bobby Brown 
　　herself, a one-of-a-kind leather Kate Spade handbag from Kate and 
　　Andy Spade, a Smythson of Bond Street burgundy leather organizer 
　　from Graydon Carter, a mink-lined sleeping bag from Miuccia Prada, a 
　　multistrand beaded Verdura bracelet from Aerin Lauder, a 
　　diamond-encrusted watch from Donatella Versace, a case of champagne 
　　from Cynthia Rowley, a matching beaded tank top and evening bag from 
　　Mark Badgley and James Mischka, a collection of Cartier pens from 
　　Irv Ravitz, a chinchilla muffler from Vera Wang, a zebra-print 
　　jacket from Alberto Ferretti, a Burberry cashmere blanket from 
　　Rosemarie Bravo. And that was just the start. There were handbags in 
　　every shape and size from everyone: Herb Ritts, Bruce Weber, Giselle 
　　Bundchen, Hillary Clinton, Tom Ford, Calvin Klein, Annie Leibovitz, 
　　Nicole Miller, Adrienne Vittadini, Michael Kors, Helmut Lang, 
　　Giorgio Armani, John Sahag, Bruno Magli, Mario Testino, and Narcisco 
　　Rodriguez, to name a few. There were dozens of donations made in 
　　Miranda’s name to various charities, what must have been a hundred 
　　bottles of wine and champagne, eight or ten Dior bags, a couple 
　　dozen scented candles, a few pieces of Oriental pottery, silk 
　　pajamas, leather-bound books, bath products, chocolates, bracelets, 
　　caviar, cashmere sweaters, framed photographs, and enough flower 
　　arrangements and/or potted plants to decorate one of those 
　　five-hundred-couple mass weddings they have in soccer stadiums in 
　　China. Ohmigod! Was this reality? Was this actually happening? Was I 
　　now working for a woman who received 256 presents at Christmas from 
　　some of the world’s most famous people? Or not so famous? I wasn’t 
　　sure. I recognized a few of the really obvious celebrities and 
　　designers, but didn’t know then that the others comprised some of 
　　the most sought-after photographers, makeup artists, models, 
　　socialites, and a whole slew of Elias-Clark executives. Just as I 
　　was wondering if Emily actually knew who all the people were, she 
　　walked back in. I tried to pretend I wasn’t reading the list, but 
　　she didn’t mind at all.

　　“Crazy, isn’t it? She is the coolest woman ever,” she gushed, 
　　snatching the sheets off her desk and gazing at them with what can 
　　only be described as lust. “Have you ever seen more amazing things 
　　in your life? This is last year’s list. I just pulled it out so we 
　　know what to expect since the gifts have begun coming in already. 
　　That’s definitely one of the best parts of the job―opening all her 
　　presents.” I was confused.We opened her presents? Why wouldn’t she 
　　open them herself? I asked as much.

　　“Are you out of your mind? Miranda won’t like ninety percent of the 
　　stuff people send. Some of it is downright insulting, things I won’t 
　　even show her. Like this,” she said, picking up a small box. It was 
　　a Bang and Olufsen portable phone in their signature sleek silver 
　　with all rounded edges and the capability to remain clear for 
　　something like 2,000 miles. I had been in the store just a couple 
　　weeks earlier, watching Alex salivate over their stereo systems, and 
　　I knew the phone cost upward of five hundred dollars and could do 
　　everything short of holding a conversationfor you. “A phone? Do you 
　　believe someone had the nerve to send Miranda Priestly aphone ?” She 
　　tossed it to me. “Keep it if you want it: I would never even let her 
　　see this. She’d be annoyed that someone sent somethingelectronic .” 
　　She pronounced the word “electronic” as though it were synonymous 
　　with “covered in bodily fluids.”

　　I tucked the phone box under my desk and tried to keep the smile off 
　　my face. It was too perfect! A portable phone was on my list of 
　　stuff that I still needed for my new room, and I’d just gotten a 
　　five-hundred-dollar one for free.

　　“Actually,” she continued, flopping down again on the floor of 
　　Miranda’s office, Indian-style, “let’s put in a few hours wrapping 
　　some more of these wine bottles, and then you can open the presents 
　　that came in today. They’re over there.” She pointed behind her desk 
　　to a smaller mountain of boxes and bags and baskets in a multitude 
　　of colors.

　　“So, these are gifts that we’re sending out from Miranda, right?” I 
　　asked her as I picked up a box and began wrapping it in the thick 
　　white paper.

　　“Yep. Every year, it’s the same deal. Top-tier people get bottles of 
　　Dom. This would include Elias execs, and the big designers who 
　　aren’t also personal friends. Her lawyer and accountant. Midlevel 
　　people get Veuve, and this is just about everyone―the twins’ 
　　teachers, the hair stylists, Uri, et cetera. The nobodies get a 
　　bottle of the Ruffino Chianti―usually they go to the PR people who 
　　send small, general gifts that aren’t personalized for her. She’ll 
　　have us send Chianti to the vet, some of the babysitters who fill in 
　　for Cara, the people who wait on her in stores she goes to often, 
　　and all the caretakers associated with the summer house in 
　　Connecticut. Anyway, I order about twenty-five thousand dollars’ 
　　worth of this stuff at the beginning of November, Sherry-Lehman 
　　delivers it, and it usually takes nearly a month to do all the 
　　wrapping. It’s good she’s out of the office now or we’d be taking 
　　this stuff Home with us to wrap. Pretty good deal, because Elias 
　　picks up the tab.”

　　“I guess it would cost double that to have the Sherry-Lehman place 
　　wrap them, huh?” I wondered, still trying to process the hierarchy 
　　of the gift-giving.

　　“What the hell do we care?” she snorted. “Trust me, you’ll learn 
　　quickly that cost is no issue around here. It’s just that Miranda 
　　doesn’t like the wrapping paper they use. I gave them this white 
　　paper last year, but they just didn’t look as nice as when we do 
　　it.” She looked proud.

　　We wrapped like that until close to six, with Emily telling me how 
　　things worked as I tried to wrap my mind around this strange and 
　　exciting world. Just as she was describing exactly how Miranda likes 
　　her Coffee (tall latte with two raw sugars), a breathless blond girl 
　　I remembered as one of the many fashion assistants walked in 
　　carrying a wicker basket the size of a baby carriage. She hovered 
　　just outside Miranda’s office, looking as though she thought the 
　　soft gray carpeting might turn to quicksand under her Jimmy Choos if 
　　she dared to cross the threshold.

　　“Hi, Em. I’ve got the skirts right here. Sorry that took so long, 
　　but no one’s around since it’s that weird time right before 
　　Thanksgiving. Anyway, hopefully you’ll find something she’ll like.” 
　　She looked down at her basket full of folded skirts.

　　Emily looked up at her with barely disguised scorn. “Just leave them 
　　on my desk. I’ll return the ones that won’t work.Which I imagine 
　　will be most of them, considering your taste .” The last part was 
　　under her breath, just loud enough for me to hear.

　　The blond girl looked bewildered. Definitely not the brightest star 
　　in the sky, but she seemed nice enough. I wondered why Emily so 
　　obviously hated her. It’d been a long day already, what with the 
　　running commentary and errands all over the city and hundreds of 
　　names and faces to try to remember, so I didn’t even ask.

　　Emily placed the large basket on her desk and looked down on it, 
　　hands on her hips. From what I could see from Miranda’s office 
　　floor, there were perhaps twenty-five different skirts in an 
　　incredible assortment of fabrics, colors, and sizes. Had she really 
　　not specified what she wanted at all? Did she really not bother to 
　　inform Emily whether she’d be needing something appropriate for a 
　　black-tie dinner or a mixed-doubles match or perhaps to use as a 
　　bathing suit cover-up? Did she want denim, or would something 
　　chiffon work better? How exactly were we supposed to predict 
　　whatmight please her?

　　I was about to find out. Emily carried the wicker basket to 
　　Miranda’s office and carefully, reverentially, placed it on the 
　　plush carpeting beside me. She sat down and began removing the 
　　skirts one by one and laying them in a circle around us. There was a 
　　beautiful crocheted skirt in shocking fuchsia by Celine, a pearl 
　　gray wraparound by Calvin Klein, and a black suede one with black 
　　beads along the bottom by Mr. de la Renta himself. There were skirts 
　　in red and ecru and lavender, some with lace and others in cashmere. 
　　A few were long enough to sweep gracefully along the ankles, and 
　　others were so short they looked more like tube tops. I picked up a 
　　midcalf, brown silk beauty and held it up to my waist, but the 
　　material covered only one of my legs. The next one in the pile 
　　reached to the floor in a swirl of tulle and chiffon and looked as 
　　though it would feel most at Home at a Charleston garden party. One 
　　of the jean skirts was prefaded and came with a gigantic brown 
　　leather belt already looped around it, and another had a crinkly, 
　　silver-material overlay on top of a slightly more opaque silver 
　　liner. Where on earth were we going here?

　　“Wow, looks like Miranda has a thing for skirts, huh?” I said, 
　　simply because I had nothing better to say.

　　“Actually, no. Miranda has a slight obsession with scarves.” Emily 
　　refused to make eye contact with me, as though she’d just revealed 
　　that she herself had herpes. “It’s just one of those cute, quirky 
　　things about her you should know.”

　　“Oh, really?” I asked, trying to sound amused and not horrified. An 
　　obsession with scarves? I like clothes and bags and shoes as much as 
　　the next girl, but I wouldn’t exactly declare any of them an 
　　“obsession.” And something about the way Emily was saying it wasn’t 
　　so casual.

　　“Yes, well, she must need a skirt for something specific, but it’s 
　　scarves that’s she’s really into. You know, like her signature 
　　scarves?” She looked at me. My face must have betrayed my complete 
　　lack of a clue. “You do remember meeting her during the interview, 
　　do you not?”

　　“Of course,” I said quickly, sensing it’d probably not be the best 
　　idea to let this girl know that I couldn’t so much as remember 
　　Miranda’s name during my interview, never mind remember what she was 
　　wearing. “But I’m not sure I noticed a scarf.”

　　“She always, always, always wears a single white Hermès scarf 
　　somewhere on her outfit. Mostly around her neck, but sometimes 
　　she’ll have her hairdresser tie one in a chignon, or occasionally 
　　she’ll use them as a belt. They’re like, her signature. Everyone 
　　knows that Miranda Priestly wears a white Hermès scarf, no matter 
　　what. How cool is that?”

　　It was at that exact moment that I noticed Emily had a lime green 
　　scarf woven through the belt loops on her cargo pants, just peeking 
　　out from underneath the white T-shirt.

　　“She likes to mix it up sometimes, and I’m guessing that this is one 
　　of those times. Anyway, those idiots in fashion never know what 
　　she’ll like. Look at some of these, they’re hideous!” She held up an 
　　absolutely gorgeous flowy skirt, slightly dressier than the rest 
　　with its little flecks of gold shimmering from the deep tan 
　　background.

　　“Yep,” I agreed, in what was to become the first of thousands, if 
　　not millions, of times I agreed with whatever she said simply to 
　　make her stop talking. “It’s horrendous-looking.” It was so 
　　beautiful I thought I’d be happy to wear it to my own wedding.

　　Emily continued prattling on about patterns and fabrics and 
　　Miranda’s needs and wants, occasionally interjecting a scathing 
　　insult about a coworker. She finally chose three radically different 
　　skirts and set them aside to send to Miranda, talking, talking, 
　　talking the whole time. I tried to listen, but it was almost seven, 
　　and I was trying to decide whether I was ravenously hungry, utterly 
　　nauseated, or just plain exhausted. I think it was all three. I 
　　didn’t even notice when the tallest human being I’d ever seen 
　　swooped into the office.

　　“YOU!” I heard from somewhere behind me. “STAND UP SO I CAN GET A 
　　LOOK AT YOU!”

　　I turned just in time to see the man, who was at least seven feet 
　　tall, with tanned skin and black hair, pointing directly at me. He 
　　had 250 pounds stretched over his incredibly tall frame and was so 
　　muscular, so positively ripped, that it looked as though he might 
　　just explode out of his denim . . . catsuit? Ohmigod! He was wearing 
　　a catsuit. Yes, yes, a denim, one-piece catsuit with tight pants and 
　　a belted waist and rolled-up sleeves. And a cape. There was actually 
　　a blanket-size fur cape tied twice around his thick neck, and shiny 
　　black combat boots the size of tennis rackets adorned his mammoth 
　　feet. He looked around thirty-five years old, although all the 
　　muscles and the deep tan and the positively chiseled jawbone could 
　　have been hiding ten years or adding five. He was flapping his hands 
　　at me and motioning for me to get up off the floor. I stood, unable 
　　to take my eyes off him, and he turned to examine me immediately.

　　“WELL! WHO DO WE HAVE HEEEEERE?” he bellowed, as best as one can in 
　　a falsetto voice. “YOU’RE PRETTY, BUT TOO WHOLESOME. AND THE OUTFIT 
　　DOES NOTHING FOR YOU!”

　　“My name’s Andrea. I’m Miranda’s new assistant.”

　　He moved his eyes up and down over my body, inspecting every inch. 
　　Emily was watching the spectacle with a sneer on her face. The 
　　silence was unbearable.

　　“KNEE-HIGH BOOTS? WITH A KNEE-LENGTH SKIRT? ARE YOU KIDDING ME? BABY 
　　GIRL, IN CASE YOU’RE UNAWARE―IN CASE YOU MISSED THE BIG, BLACK SIGN 
　　BY THE DOOR―THIS ISRUNWAY MAGAZINE, THE FUCKINGHIIPPEST MAGAZINE ON 
　　EARTH. ON EARTH! BUT NO WORRIES, HONEY, NIGEL WILL GET RID OF THAT 
　　JERSEY MALL-RAT LOOK YOU’VE GOT GOING SOON ENOUGH.”

　　He put both his massive hands on my hips and twirled me around. I 
　　could feel his eyes looking at my legs and tush.

　　“SOON ENOUGH, SWEETIE, I PROMISE YOU, BECAUSE YOU’RE GOOD RAW 
　　MATERIAL. NICE LEGS, GREAT HAIR, AND NOT FAT. I CAN WORK WITH NOT 
　　FAT. SOON ENOUGH, SWEETIE.”

　　I wanted to be offended, to pull myself away from the grip he had on 
　　my lower body, to take a few minutes and mull over the fact that a 
　　complete stranger―and a coworker, no less―had just provided an 
　　unsolicited and unflinchingly honest account of my outfit and my 
　　figure, but I wasn’t. I liked his kind green eyes that seemed to 
　　laugh instead of taunt, but more than that, I liked that I had 
　　passed. This was Nigel― single name, like Madonna or Prince―the 
　　fashion authority whom even I recognized from TV, magazines, the 
　　society pages, everywhere, and he had called me pretty. And said I 
　　had nice legs! I let the mall-rat comment slide. Iliked this guy.

　　I heard Emily tell him to leave me alone from somewhere in the 
　　background, but I didn’t want him to go. Too late, he was already 
　　heading for the door, his fur cape flapping behind him. I wanted to 
　　call out, tell him it had been nice to meet him, that I wasn’t 
　　offended by what he said and was excited that he wanted to redo me. 
　　But before I could say a thing, Nigel whipped around and covered the 
　　space between us in two strides, each the length of a long jump. He 
　　planted himself directly in front of me, wrapped my entire body with 
　　his massive, rippling arms, and pressed me to him. My head rested 
　　just below his chest, and I smelled the unmistakable scent of 
　　Johnson’s Baby Lotion. And just as I had the presence of mind to hug 
　　him back, he flung me backward, engulfed both of my hands in his, 
　　and screeched:

　　“WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE, BABY!”


　　5

　　“He said what?” Lily asked as she licked a spoonful of green tea ice 
　　cream. She and I had met at Sushi Samba at nine so I could update 
　　her on my first day. My parents had grudgingly forked over the 
　　emergencies-only credit card again until I got my first paycheck. 
　　Spicy tuna rolls and seaweed salads certainly felt like an 
　　emergency, and so I silently thanked Mom and Dad for treating Lily 
　　and me so well.

　　“He said, ‘Welcome to the dollhouse, baby.’ I swear. How cool is 
　　that?”

　　She looked at me, mouth hung open, spoon suspended in midair.

　　“You have the coolest job I’ve ever heard of,” said Lily, who always 
　　talked about how she should’ve worked for a year before going back 
　　to school.

　　“It does seem pretty cool, doesn’t it? Definitely weird, but cool, 
　　too. Whatever,” I said, digging in to my oozing chocolate brownie. 
　　“It’s not like I wouldn’t rather be a student again than doing any 
　　of this.”

　　“Yeah, I’m sure you’d just love to work part-time to finance your 
　　obscenely expensive and utterly useless Ph.D. You would, wouldn’t 
　　you? You’re jealous that I get to bartend in an undergrad pub, get 
　　hit on by freshmen until fourA .M. every night, and then head to 
　　class all day, aren’t you? All of it knowing that if―and that’s a 
　　big, fat if―you manage to finish at some point in the next seventeen 
　　years, you’ll never get a job. Anywhere.” She plastered on a big, 
　　fake smile and took a swig of her Sapporo. Lily was studying for her 
　　Ph.D. in Russian Literature at Columbia and working odd jobs every 
　　free second she wasn’t studying. Her grandmother barely had enough 
　　money to support herself, and Lily wouldn’t qualify for grants until 
　　she’d finished her master’s, so it was remarkable she’d even come 
　　out that night.

　　I took the bait, as I always did when she bitched about her life. 
　　“So why do you do it, Lil?” I asked, even though I’d heard the 
　　answer a million times.

　　Lily snorted and rolled her eyes again. “Because I love it!” she 
　　sang sarcastically. And even though she’d never admit it because it 
　　was so much more fun to complain, she did love it. She’d developed a 
　　thing for Russian culture ever since her eighth-grade teacher told 
　　her that Lily looked how he had always pictured Lolita, with her 
　　round face and curly black hair. She went directly Home and read 
　　Nabokov’s masterpiece of lechery, never allowing the whole 
　　teacher-Lolita reference to bother her, and then read everything 
　　else Nabokov wrote. And Tolstoy. And Gogol. And Chekhov. By the time 
　　college rolled around, she was applying to Brown to work with a 
　　specific Russian lit professor who, upon interviewing 
　　seventeen-year-old Lily, had declared her one of the most well read 
　　and passionate students of Russian literature he’d ever 
　　met―undergrad, graduate, or otherwise. She still loved it, still 
　　studied Russian grammar and could read anything in its original, but 
　　she enjoyed whining about it more.

　　“Yeah, well, I definitely agree that I have the best gig around. I 
　　mean, Tommy Hilfiger? Chanel? Oscar de la Renta’s apartment? Quite a 
　　first day. I have to say, I’m not quite sure how all of this is 
　　going to get me any closer toThe New Yorker, but maybe it’s just too 
　　early to tell. It’s just not seeming like reality, you know?”

　　“Well, anytime you feel like getting back in touch with reality, you 
　　know where to find me,” Lily said, taking her MetroCard out of her 
　　purse. “If you get a craving for a little ghetto, if you’re just 
　　dying to keep it real in Harlem, well, my luxurious 
　　two-hundred-and-fifty-square-foot studio is all yours.”

　　I paid the check and we hugged good-bye, and she tried to give me 
　　specific instructions on how to get from Seventh Avenue and 
　　Christopher Street to my own sublet all the way uptown. I swore up 
　　and down that I understood exactly where to find the L-train and 
　　then the 6, and how to walk from the 96th Street stop to my 
　　apartment, but as soon as she left, I jumped in a cab.

　　Just this once,I thought to myself, sinking into the warm backseat 
　　and trying not to breathe in the driver’s body odor.I’m a Runwaygirl 
　　now .

　　I was pleased to discover that the rest of that first week wasn’t 
　　much different than the first day. On Friday, Emily and I met in the 
　　stark white lobby again at sevenA .M., and this time she handed me 
　　my own ID card, complete with a picture that I didn’t remember 
　　taking.

　　“From the security camera,” she said when I stared at it. “They’re 
　　everywhere around here, just so you know. They’ve had some major 
　　problems with people stealing stuff, the clothes and jewelry called 
　　in for shoots; it seems the messengers and sometimes even the 
　　editors just help themselves. So now they track everyone.” She slid 
　　her card down the slot and the thick glass door clicked open.

　　“Track? What exactly do you mean by ‘track’?”

　　She moved quickly down the hallway toward our offices, her hips 
　　swishing back and forth, back and forth in the skintight tan Seven 
　　cords she was wearing. She’d told me the day before that I should 
　　seriously consider getting a pair or ten, as these were among the 
　　only jeans or corduroys that Miranda would permit people to wear in 
　　the office. Those and the MJ’s were OK, but only on Friday, and only 
　　if worn with high heels. MJ’s? “Marc Jacobs,” she had said, 
　　exasperated.

　　“Well, between the cameras and the cards, they kind of know what 
　　everyone’s doing,” she said as she dropped her Gucci logo tote on 
　　her desk. She began unbuttoning her very fitted leather blazer, a 
　　coat that looked supremely inadequate for the late-November weather. 
　　“I don’t think they actually look at the cameras unless something’s 
　　missing, but the cards tell everything. Like, every time you swipe 
　　it downstairs to get past the security counter or on the floor to 
　　get in the door, they know where you are. That’s how they tell if 
　　people are at work, so if you have to be out―and you never will, but 
　　just in case something really awful happens―you’ll just give me your 
　　card and I’ll swipe it. That way you’ll still get paid for all the 
　　days you miss, even if you go over. You’ll do the same for 
　　me―everyone does it.”

　　I was still reeling from the “and you never will” part, but she 
　　continued her briefing.

　　“And that’s how you’ll get food in the dining room also. It’s a 
　　debit card: just put on some money and it gets deducted at the 
　　register. Of course, that’s how they can tell what you’re eating,” 
　　she said, unlocking Miranda’s office door and plopping herself on 
　　the floor. She immediately reached for a boxed bottle of wine and 
　　began wrapping.

　　“Do they care what you eat?” I asked, feeling as though I’d just 
　　stepped directly into a scene fromSliver.

　　“Um, I’m not sure. Maybe? I just know they can tell. And the gym, 
　　too. You have to use it there, and at the newsstand to buy books or 
　　magazines. I think it just helps them stay organized.”

　　Stay organized? I was working for a company who defined good 
　　“organization” as knowing which floor each employee visited, whether 
　　they preferred onion soup or Caesar salad for lunch, and just how 
　　many minutes they could tolerate the elliptical machine? I was a 
　　lucky, lucky girl.

　　Exhausted from my fourth morning of waking up at five-thirty, it 
　　took me another five full minutes to work up the energy to climb out 
　　of my coat and settle down at my desk. I thought about putting my 
　　head down to rest for just a moment, but Emily cleared her throat. 
　　Loudly.

　　“Um, you want to get in here and help me?” she asked, although it 
　　was clearly no question. “Here, wrap something.” She thrust a pile 
　　of white paper my way and resumed her task. Jewel blasted from the 
　　extra speakers attached to her iMac.

　　Cut, place, fold, tape:Emily and I worked steadily through the 
　　morning, stopping only to call the downstairs messenger center each 
　　time we’d finished with twenty-five boxes. They’d hold them until we 
　　gave the green light for them to be fanned out all over Manhattan in 
　　mid-December. We’d already completed all of the out-of-town bottles 
　　during my first two days, and those were piled in the Closet waiting 
　　for DHL to pick them up. Considering each and every one was set to 
　　be sent first-day priority, arriving at their locations at the 
　　earliest possible time the very next morning, I wasn’t sure what the 
　　rush was―considering it was only the end of November―but I’d already 
　　learned it was better not to ask questions. We would be FedExing 
　　about 150 bottles all over the world. The Priestly bottles would 
　　make it to Paris, Cannes, Bordeaux, Milan, Rome, Florence, 
　　Barcelona, Geneva, Brugges, Stockholm, Amsterdam, and London. Dozens 
　　to London! FedEx would jet them to Beijing and Hong Kong and 
　　Capetown and Tel Aviv and Dubai (Dubai!). They would be toasting 
　　Miranda Priestly in Los Angeles, Honolulu, New Orleans, Charleston, 
　　Houston, Bridgehampton, and Nantucket. And those all before any went 
　　out in New York―the city that contained all of Miranda’s friends, 
　　doctors, maids, hair stylists, nannies, makeup artists, shrinks, 
　　yoga instructors, personal trainers, drivers, and personal shoppers. 
　　Of course, this was where most of the fashion-industry people were, 
　　too: the designers, models, actors, editors, advertisers, PR folks, 
　　and all-around style mavens would each receive a level-appropriate 
　　bottle lovingly delivered by an Elias-Clark messenger.

　　“How much do you think all of this costs?” I asked Emily, while 
　　snipping what felt like the millionth piece of thick white paper.

　　“I told you, I ordered twenty-five thousand dollars’ worth of 
　　booze.”

　　“No, no―how much do you think it costs altogether? I mean, to 
　　overnight all these packages all over the world, well, I bet that in 
　　some cases the shipping costs more than the bottle itself, 
　　especially if they’re getting a nobody bottle.”

　　She looked intrigued. It was the first time I’d seen her look at me 
　　with anything other than disgust, exasperation, or indifference. 
　　“Well, let’s see. If you figure that all the domestic FedExes are 
　　somewhere in the twenty-dollar range, and all the international are 
　　about $60, then that equals $9,000 for FedEx. I think I heard 
　　somewhere that the messengers charge eleven bucks a package, so 
　　sending out 250 of those would be $2,750. And our time, well, if it 
　　takes us a full week to wrap everything, then added together, that’s 
　　two full weeks of both our salaries, which is another four grand―”

　　It was here I flinched inwardly, realizing that both of our salaries 
　　together for an entire week’s work was by far the most insignificant 
　　expense.

　　“Yeah, it comes to around $16,000 in total. Crazy, huh? But what 
　　choice is there? She is Miranda Priestly, you know.”

　　At about one Emily announced she was hungry and was heading 
　　downstairs to get some lunch with a few of the girls in accessories. 
　　I assumed she meant she would pick up her lunch, since that’s what 
　　we’d been doing all week, so I waited for ten minutes, fifteen 
　　minutes, twenty, but she never reappeared with her food. Neither of 
　　us had actually eaten in the dining room since I’d started in case 
　　Miranda called, but this was ridiculous. Two o’clock came and then 
　　two-thirty and then three, and all I could think about was how 
　　hungry I was. I tried calling Emily’s Cell Phone, but it went 
　　directly to voice mail. Could she have died in the dining room? I 
　　wondered. Choked on some plain lettuce, or simply slumped over after 
　　downing a smoothie? I thought about asking someone to pick something 
　　up for me, but it seemed too prima donnaCish to ask a perfect 
　　stranger to fetch me lunch. After all,I was supposed to be the 
　　lunch-fetcher:Oh, yes, darling, I’m simply too important to abandon 
　　my post here wrapping presents, so I was wondering if you might pick 
　　me up a turkey and brie croissant? Lovely . I just couldn’t do it. 
　　So when four o’clock rolled around and there was still no sign of 
　　Emily and no call from Miranda, I did the unthinkable: I left the 
　　office unattended.

　　After peeking down the hall and confirming that Emily was nowhere in 
　　sight, I literally ran to the reception area and pushed the down 
　　button twenty times. Sophy, the gorgeous Asian receptionist, raised 
　　her eyebrows and looked away, and I wasn’t sure if it was my 
　　impatience or her knowledge that Miranda’s office was abandoned that 
　　made her look at me that way. No time to figure it out. The elevator 
　　finally arrived, and I was able to throw myself onboard even as a 
　　sneering, heroin-thin guy with spiky hair and lime green Pumas was 
　　pushing “Door Close.” No one moved aside to give me room even though 
　　there was plenty of space. And while this would’ve normally driven 
　　me crazy, all I could concentrate on was getting food and getting 
　　back, ASAP.

　　The entrance to the all-glass-and-granite dining room was blocked by 
　　a group of Clackers-in-training, all leaning in and whispering, 
　　examining each group of people who got off the elevator. Friends of 
　　Elias employees, I immediately recalled from Emily’s description of 
　　such groups, obvious from their unmasked excitement to be standing 
　　at the center of it all. Lily had already begged me to take her to 
　　the dining room since it’d been written up in nearly every Manhattan 
　　newspaper and magazine for its incredible food quality and 
　　selection―not to mention its gaggle of gorgeous people―but I wasn’t 
　　ready for that yet. Besides, due to the complex office-sitting 
　　schedule Emily and I negotiated each day so far, I’d yet to spend 
　　more time there than the two and a half minutes it took to choose 
　　and pay for my food, and I wasn’t sure I ever would.

　　I pushed my way past the girls and felt them turn to see if I was 
　　anyone important. Negative. Weaving quickly, intently, I bypassed 
　　gorgeous racks of lamb and veal marsala in the entrees section and, 
　　with a push of willpower, cruised right past the sundried tomato and 
　　goat cheese pizza special (which resided on a small table banished 
　　to the sidelines that everyone referred to as “Carb Corner”). It 
　　wasn’t as easy to navigate around thepièce de résistance of the 
　　room, the salad bar (also known just as “Greens,” as in “I’ll meet 
　　you at Greens”), which was as long as an airport landing strip and 
　　accessible from four different directions, but the hordes let me 
　　pass when I loudly assured them that I wasn’t going after the last 
　　of the tofu cubes. All the way in the back, directly behind the 
　　panini stand that actually resembled a makeup counter, was the 
　　single, lone soup station. Lone because the soup chef was the only 
　　one in the entire dining room who refused to make a single one of 
　　his offerings low fat, reduced fat, fat-free, low sodium, or low 
　　carb. He simply refused. As a result, his was the single table in 
　　the entire room without a line, and I sprinted directly toward him 
　　every day. Since it appeared that I was the only one in the entire 
　　company who actually bought soup―and I’d only been there a week―the 
　　higher-ups had slashed his menu to a solitary soup per day. I prayed 
　　for tomato cheddar. Instead, he ladled out a giant cup of New 
　　England clam chowder, proudly declaring it was made with heavy 
　　cream. Three people at Greens turned to stare. The only obstacle 
　　left was dodging the crowds around the chef’s table, where a 
　　visiting chef in full whites was arranging large chunks of sashimi 
　　for what appeared to be adoring fans. I read the nametag on his 
　　starched white collar: Nobu Matsuhisa. I made a mental note to look 
　　him up when I got upstairs, since I seemed to be the only employee 
　　in the place who wasn’t fawning all over him. Was it worse to have 
　　never heard of Mr. Matsuhisa or Miranda Priestly?

　　The petite cashier looked first at the soup and then at my hips when 
　　she rang me up. Or had she? I’d already grown accustomed to being 
　　looked up and down every time I went anywhere, and I could’ve sworn 
　　she was looking at me with the same expression I would’ve given a 
　　five-hundred-pound person with eight Big Macs arrayed in from of 
　　him: the eyes raised just enough as if to ask, “Do youreally need 
　　that?” But I brushed my paranoia aside and reminded myself that the 
　　woman was simply a cashier in a cafeteria, not a Weight Watchers 
　　counselor. Or a fashion editor.

　　“So. Not many people buying the soup these days,” she said quietly, 
　　punching numbers on the register.

　　“Yeah, I guess not that many people like New England clam chowder,” 
　　I mumbled, swiping my card and willing her hands to move faster, 
　　faster.

　　She stopped and turned her narrowed brown eyes directly toward mine. 
　　“No, I think it’s because the soup chef insists on making these 
　　really fattening things―do you have any idea how many calories are 
　　in that? Do you have any idea how fattening that little cup of soup 
　　is? I’m just saying is, someone could put on ten pounds from just 
　　looking at it―”And you’re not one who could afford to gain ten 
　　pounds, she implied.

　　Ouch. As if it hadn’t been hard enough convincing myself that I was 
　　a normal weight for a normal height as all the tall, willowyRunway 
　　blondes had openly examined me, now thecashier was―for all intents 
　　and purposes―telling me I was fat? I snatched my takeout bag and 
　　pushed past the people, and walked into the bathroom that was 
　　conveniently located directly outside the dining room, where one 
　　could purge any earlier bingeing problems. And even though I knew 
　　that the mirror would reveal nothing more or less than it had that 
　　morning, I turned to face it head on. A twisted, angry face stared 
　　back at me.

　　“What the hell are you doing here?” Emily all but shouted at my 
　　reflection. I whipped around in time to see her hanging her leather 
　　blazer through the handle of the Gucci logo tote, as she pushed her 
　　sunglasses on top of her head. It occurred to me that Emily had 
　　meant what she’d said three and a half hours before quite literally: 
　　she’d gone out for lunch. As in, outside. As in, left me all alone 
　　for three straight hours with no warning, practically tethered to a 
　　phone line with no hopes of food or bathroom breaks. As in, none of 
　　that mattered because I still knew I was wrong to leave and I was 
　　about to get screamed at for it by someone my own age. Blessedly, 
　　the door swung open and the editor in chief ofCoquette strode in. 
　　She looked us both up and down as Emily grabbed my arm and steered 
　　me out of the bathroom and toward the elevator. We stood like that 
　　together, her clutching my arm and me feeling as though I’d just wet 
　　the bed. We were living one of those scenes where the kidnapper puts 
　　a gun to a woman’s back in broad daylight and quietly threatens her 
　　as he leads her to his basement of torture.

　　“How could you do this to me?” she hissed as she pushed me 
　　throughRunway ’s reception-area doors and we hurtled together back 
　　to our desks. “As the senior assistant, I am responsible for what 
　　goes on in our office. I know you’re new, but I’ve told you from the 
　　very first day: we do not leave Miranda unattended.”

　　“But Miranda’s not here.” It came out as a squeak.

　　“But she could’ve called while you were gone and no one would’ve 
　　been here to answer the goddamn phone!” she screamed as she slammed 
　　the door to our suite. “Our first priority―our only priority―is 
　　Miranda Priestly. Period. And if you can’t deal with that, just 
　　remember that there are millions of girls who would die for your 
　　job. Now check your voice mail. If she called, we’re dead.You’re 
　　dead.”

　　I wanted to crawl inside my iMac and die. How could I have screwed 
　　up so badly during my very first week? Miranda wasn’t even in the 
　　office and I’d already let her down. So what if I was hungry? It 
　　could wait. There were genuinely important people trying to get 
　　things done around here, people who depended on me, and I’d let them 
　　down. I dialed my mailbox.

　　“Hi, Andy, it’s me.” Alex. “Where are you? I’ve never heard you not 
　　answer. Can’t wait for dinner tonight―we’re still on, right? 
　　Anywhere you want, your pick. Call me when you get this, I’ll be in 
　　the faculty lounge anytime after four. Love you.” I immediately felt 
　　guilty, because I’d already decided after the whole lunch debacle 
　　that I’d rather reschedule. My first week had been so crazy that 
　　we’d barely seen each other, and we’d made a special plan to have 
　　dinner that night, just the two of us. But I knew I wouldn’t be any 
　　fun if I fell asleep in my wine, and I kind of wanted a night to 
　　unwind and be alone. I’d have to remember to call and see if we 
　　could do it the next night.

　　Emily was standing over me, having already checked her own voice 
　　mail. From her relatively calm face, I guessed that Miranda had not 
　　left her any death threats. I shook my head to indicate that I 
　　hadn’t gotten one from her yet.

　　“Hi, Andrea, it’s Cara.” Miranda’s nanny. “So, Miranda called here a 
　　little while ago”―heart stoppage―“and said she’s tried the office 
　　and no one was picking up. I figured something was going on down 
　　there, so I told her that I’d spoken to both you and Emily just a 
　　minute before, but don’t worry about it. She wanted aWomen’s Wear 
　　Daily faxed to her, and I had a copy right here. Already confirmed 
　　that she got it, too, so don’t stress. Just wanted to let you know. 
　　Anyway, have a good weekend. I’ll talk to you later. ’Bye.”

　　lifesaver. The girl was an absolute saint. It was hard to believe 
　　I’d only known her a week―and not even in person, only over the 
　　phone―because I thought I was in love with her. She was the opposite 
　　of Emily in every regard: calm, grounded, and entirely 
　　fashion-oblivious. She recognized Miranda’s absurdity but didn’t 
　　begrudge her it; she had that rare, charming quality of being able 
　　to laugh at herself and everyone else.

　　“Nope, not her,” I told Emily, lying sort of but not really, smiling 
　　triumphantly. “We’re in the clear.”

　　“You’rein the clear, this time,” she said flatly. “Just remember 
　　that we’re in this together, but I am in charge. You’ll cover for me 
　　if I want to go out to lunch once in a while―I’m entitled. This will 
　　never happen again, right?”

　　I bit back the urge to say something nasty. “Right,” I said. 
　　“Right.”

　　We’d managed to finish wrapping the rest of the bottles and get them 
　　all to the messengers by seven that night, and Emily didn’t mention 
　　the office-abandonment issue again. I finally fell into a taxi (just 
　　this one time) at eight, and was spread-eagle, still fully dressed, 
　　on top of my covers at ten. And I still hadn’t eaten because I 
　　couldn’t bear the thought of going out in search of food and getting 
　　lost again, as I had the past four nights, in my own neighborhood. I 
　　called Lily to complain on my brand-new Bang and Olufsen phone.

　　“Hi! I thought you and Alex had a date tonight,” she said.

　　“Yeah, we did, but I’m dead. He’s fine with doing it tomorrow night, 
　　and I think I’ll just order. Whatever. How was your day?”

　　“I have one word: screwed up. OK, so that was two. You’ll never 
　　imagine what happened. Well, of course you will, it happens all 
　　the―”

　　“Cut to it, Lil. I’m going to pass out any minute.”

　　“OK. Cutest guy ever came to my reading today. Sat through the whole 
　　thing looking absolutely fascinated, and waited for me afterward. 
　　Asked if he could take me for a drink and hear all about the thesis 
　　I had published at Brown, which he’d already read.”

　　“Sounds great. What was he?” Lily went out with different guys 
　　almost every night after getting off work, but had yet to complete 
　　her fraction. She had founded the Scale of Fractional Love one night 
　　after listening to a few of our guy friends rate the girls they were 
　　dating on their own invention, the Ten-Ten Scale. “She’s a six, 
　　eight, B-plus,” Jake would declare of the advertising assistant he’d 
　　been set up with the night before. It was assumed everyone knew that 
　　it was a ten-point scale, with face always being the first numerical 
　　ranking, body the second, and personality coming in last with a 
　　slightly more generalized letter grade. Since there were clearly 
　　more factors at work in judging guys, Lily devised the Fractional 
　　Scale, which had a total of ten pieces that each earned a point. The 
　　Perfect Guy would obviously have all five of the primary pieces: 
　　intelligence, sense of humor, decent body, cute face, and any sort 
　　of job that fell under the generous umbrella of “normal.” Since it 
　　was next to impossible to find The Perfect Guy, someone could up 
　　their fraction by earning points on the secondary five, which 
　　included a definitive lack of psycho ex-girlfriends, psycho parents, 
　　or date-rapist roommates, and any sort of extracurricular interests 
　　or hobbies that weren’t sports- or porn-related. So far, the highest 
　　anyone had received was a nine-tenths, but he had broken up with 
　　her.

　　“Well, at first he was going strong at seven-tenths. He was a 
　　theater major at Yaleand he’s straight, and he could discuss Israeli 
　　politics so intelligently that he never once suggested that we ‘just 
　　nuke ’em,’ so that was good.”

　　“Sure sounds good. I can’t wait for the clincher. What was it? Did 
　　he talk about his favorite Nintendo game?”

　　“Worse.” She sighed.

　　“Is he thinner than you?”

　　“Worse.” She sounded defeated.

　　“What on earth could be worse than that?”

　　“He lives on Long Island―”

　　“Lily! So he’s geographically undesirable. That doesn’t make him 
　　undateable! You know better than to―”

　　“With his parents,” she interrupted.

　　Oh.

　　“For the past four years.”

　　Oh, my.

　　“And he absolutely loves it. Says he can’t imagine wanting to live 
　　alone in such a big city when his mom and dad are such great 
　　company.”

　　“Whoa! Say no more. I don’t think we’ve ever had a seven-tenths fall 
　　all the way to a zero after the first date. Your guy set a new 
　　record. Congratulations. Your day was officially worse than mine.” I 
　　leaned over to kick my bedroom door closed when I heard Shanti and 
　　Kendra come Home from work. I heard a guy’s voice with them and 
　　wondered if either of my roommates had boyfriends. I’d seen them a 
　　combined total of only ten minutes in the last week and a half, 
　　because they seemed to work longer hours than I did.

　　“That bad? How could your day be bad? You work infashion, ” she 
　　said.

　　There was a quiet knocking on the door.

　　“Hold on a sec, someone’s here. Come in!” I called to the door, much 
　　too loud for the tiny space. I waited for one of my quiet roommates 
　　to timidly ask if I’d remembered to call the landlord to put my name 
　　on the lease (no) or bought more paper plates (no) or had taken down 
　　any phone messages (no), but Alex appeared.

　　“Hey, can I call you back? Alex just showed up.” I was thrilled to 
　　see him, so excited that he’d surprised me, but a small part of me 
　　had been looking forward to just taking a shower and crawling into 
　　bed.

　　“Sure. Tell him I say hi. And remember what a lucky girl you are for 
　　having completed the fraction with him, Andy. He’s great. Hold on to 
　　that one.”

　　“Don’t I know it. The kid’s a goddamn saint.” I smiled in his 
　　direction.

　　“’Bye.”

　　“Hi!” I willed myself to first sit up, then stand up and walk over 
　　to him. “What a great surprise!” I went to hug him but he backed 
　　away, keeping his arms behind his back. “What’s wrong?”

　　“Nothing at all. I know you’ve had such a long week, and, knowing 
　　you, I figured you hadn’t bothered to eat yet, so I brought the food 
　　to you.” He pulled a huge brown paper bag from behind his back, one 
　　of the old-school grocery style ones, and it already had some 
　　delicious-smelling grease stains on it. All of a sudden, I was 
　　starving.

　　“You did not! How’d you know that I was sitting here this very 
　　second, wondering how I was going to motivate to find food? I was 
　　just about to give up.”

　　“So come here and eat!” He looked pleased and pulled open the bag, 
　　but we both couldn’t fit on the floor of my bedroom together. I 
　　thought about eating in the living room since there was no kitchen, 
　　but Kendra and Shanti had both collapsed in front of the TV 
　　together, their untouched takeout salads open in front of them. I 
　　thought they were waiting until theReal World episode they were 
　　watching was over, but then I noticed that they’d both already 
　　fallen asleep. Sweet lives we all had.

　　“Hold on, I have an idea,” he said and tiptoed to the kitchen. He 
　　came back with two oversize garbage bags and spread them out over my 
　　blue comforter. He dug into the greasy bag and brought out two giant 
　　burgers with everything and one extra-large order of fries. He’d 
　　remembered ketchup packets and tons of salt for me, and even the 
　　napkins. I clapped I was so excited, although a quick visual of the 
　　imagined disappointment on Miranda’s face appeared, one that 
　　said,You? You’re eating a burger?

　　“I’m not done yet. Here, check it out.” And out of his backpack came 
　　a fistful of tiny vanilla tea lights, a bottle of screw-top red 
　　wine, and two waxy paper cups.

　　“You’re kidding,” I said softly, still not believing that he’d put 
　　all this together after I’d canceled our date.

　　He handed me a cup of wine and tapped it with his. “No, I’m not. You 
　　think I was going to miss hearing about the first week of the rest 
　　of your life? To my best girl.”

　　“Thank you.” I said, slowly taking a sip. “Thank you, thank you, 
　　thank you.”


　　6

　　“Ohmigod, is it the fashion editor herself?” Jill mock-shrieked when 
　　she opened the front door. “Come on over here and let your big 
　　sister genuflect a li’l.”

　　“Fashion editor?” I snorted. “Hardly. Try fashion mishap. Welcome 
　　back to civilization.” I hugged her for what felt like ten minutes 
　　and didn’t want to let go. It was hard when she’d started at 
　　Stanford and left me all alone with our parents when I was a mere 
　　nine years old, but it was even harder when she’d followed her 
　　boyfriend―now husband―to Houston. Houston! The whole placed seemed 
　　drenched in humidity and infested with mosquitoes to the point of 
　　unbearability, and if that wasn’t bad enough, my sister―my 
　　sophisticated, beautiful big sister who loved neoclassical art and 
　　made your heart melt when she recited poetry―had developed a 
　　southern accent. And not just a slight accent with a subtle, 
　　charming southern lilt, but an all-out, unmistakable, 
　　like-a-drill-through-the-eardrum redneck drawl. I’d yet to forgive 
　　Kyle for dragging her to that wretched place, even if he was a 
　　pretty decent brother-in-law, and it didn’t help when he opened his 
　　mouth.

　　“Hey there, Andy darlin’, you’re looking more beautiful every time I 
　　see you.”Yer lookin’ more beeyootiful avery time I see ya . “What 
　　are they feeding y’all atRunway, huh?”

　　I wanted to stick a tennis ball in his mouth to keep him from 
　　talking anymore, but he smiled at me and I walked over and hugged 
　　him. He might sound like a hick and grin a little too openly and 
　　often, but he tried really hard and he clearly adored my sister. I 
　　vowed to make a sincere effort not to visibly cringe when he spoke. 
　　“It’s not really what I’d call a feeding-friendly kind of place, if 
　　you know what I mean. Whatever it is, it’s definitely in the water 
　　and not the food. But never mind. Kyle, you look great yourself. 
　　Keeping my sister busy in the city of misery, I hope?”

　　“Andy, just come and visit, sweetie. Bring Alex along and y’all can 
　　make it a li’l vacation. It’s not that bad, you’ll see.” He smiled 
　　first at me and then at Jill, who smiled back and brushed the back 
　　of her hand across his cheek. They were disgustingly in love.

　　“Really, Andy, it’s a culture-rich place with a whole lot to do. We 
　　both wish you’d come visit us more often. It’s just not right that 
　　the only time we see each other is in this house,” she said, waving 
　　expansively around our parents’ living room. “I mean, if you can 
　　stand Avon, you can certainly stand Houston.”

　　“Andy, you’re here! Jay, the big New York City career girl is here, 
　　come say hi,” my mom called as she rounded the corner coming from 
　　the kitchen. “I thought you were going to call when you got to the 
　　train station.”

　　“Mrs. Myers was picking Erika up from the same train, so she just 
　　dropped me off. When are we eating? I’m starving.”

　　“Now. Do you want to clean up? We can wait. You look a little ragged 
　　from the train. You know, it’s fine if―”

　　“Mother!” I shot her a warning look.

　　“Andy! You look dynamite. Come here and give your old man a hug.” My 
　　dad, tall and still very handsome in his midfifties, smiled from the 
　　hallway. He was holding a Scrabble box behind his back that he only 
　　let me see by flashing it quickly by the side of his leg. He waited 
　　until everyone looked away from him and pointed to the box and 
　　mouthed, “I’ll kick your ass. Consider yourself warned.”

　　I smiled and nodded my head. Contrary to all common sense, I found 
　　myself looking forward to the next forty-eight hours with my family 
　　more than I had in the four years since I’d left Home. Thanksgiving 
　　was my favorite holiday, and this year I was set to enjoy it more 
　　than ever.

　　We gathered in the dining room and dug into the massive meal that my 
　　mother had expertly ordered, her traditional Jewish version of a 
　　night-before-Thanksgiving feast. Bagels and lox and cream cheese and 
　　whitefish and latkes all professionally arranged on rigid disposable 
　　serving platters, waiting to be transferred to paper plates and 
　　consumed with plastic forks and knives. My mother smiled lovingly as 
　　her brood dug in, with a look of pride on her face as if she’d been 
　　cooking for a week to sustain and nurture her babies.

　　I told them all about the new job, tried as best as I could to 
　　describe a job that I didn’t yet fully understand myself. Briefly I 
　　wondered if it sounded ridiculous to tell them how the skirts were 
　　called in and all the hours I’d logged wrapping and sending 
　　presents, and how there was a little electronic ID card that tracked 
　　everything you did. It was hard to fit into words the sense of 
　　urgency each of these had taken on at the time, how when I was at 
　　work it seemed that my job was supremely relevant, even important. I 
　　talked and talked, but I didn’t know how to explain this world that 
　　may have been only two hours away geographically but was really in a 
　　different solar system. They all nodded and smiled and asked 
　　questions, pretending to be interested, but I knew it was all too 
　　foreign, too absolutely strange sounding and different to make any 
　　sense to people who―like me until a few weeks earlier―had never even 
　　heard the name Miranda Priestly. It didn’t make much sense to me 
　　yet, either: it seemed overly dramatic at times and more than a 
　　little Big BrotherCesque, but it was exciting. And cool. It was 
　　definitely, undeniably a supercool place to call work. Right?

　　“Well, Andy, you think you’ll be happy there for your year? Maybe 
　　you’ll even want to stay longer, huh?” My mom asked while smearing 
　　cream cheese on her salt bagel.

　　In signing my contract at Elias-Clark, I’d agreed to stay with 
　　Miranda for a year―if I didn’t get fired, which at this point seemed 
　　like a big if. And if I fulfilled my obligation with class and 
　　enthusiasm and some level of competence―and this part was not in 
　　writing but implied by a half-dozen people in HR, and Emily, and 
　　Allison―then I would be in a position to name the job I’d like next. 
　　It was expected, of course, that whichever job that may be would be 
　　atRunway or, at the very least, at Elias-Clark, but I was free to 
　　request anything from working on book reviews in the features 
　　department to acting as a liaison between Hollywood celebrities 
　　andRunway . Out of the last ten assistants who had made it through 
　　their year in Miranda’s office, a full hundred percent had chosen to 
　　move to the fashion department atRunway , but I didn’t let that 
　　concern me. A stint in Miranda’s office was considered to be the 
　　ultimate way to skip three to five years of indignity as an 
　　assistant and move directly into meaningful jobs in prestigious 
　　places.

　　“Definitely. So far everyone seems really nice. Emily’s a little, 
　　um, well,committed, but otherwise, it’s been great. I don’t know, to 
　　listen to Lily talk about her exams or Alex talk about all the 
　　shitty things he has to deal with at work, I think I got pretty 
　　lucky. Who else gets to drive around in a chauffeured car on their 
　　first day? I mean, really. So yeah, I think it’ll be a great year, 
　　and I’m excited for Miranda to come back. I think I’m ready.”

　　Jill rolled her eyes and shot me a look as if to say,Cut the 
　　bullshit, Andy. We all know you’re probably working for a psycho 
　　bitch surrounded by anorexic fashionistas and are trying to paint 
　　this really rosy picture because you’re worried you’re in over your 
　　head, but instead she said, “It sounds great, Andy, it really does. 
　　Amazing opportunity.”

　　She was the only one at the table who could possibly understand, 
　　since, before moving to the Third World, she’d worked for a year at 
　　a small private museum in Paris and had developed an interest in 
　　haute couture. Hers was more of an artistic and aesthetic hobby than 
　　a consumer one, but she still had some exposure, at least, to the 
　　fashion world. “We have some great news, too,” she continued, 
　　reaching across the table for Kyle’s hand. He had set down his 
　　Coffee and extended both his hands.

　　“Oh, thank god,” my mother instantly exclaimed, slumping over as if 
　　someone had finally lifted the two-hundred-pound dumbbell that had 
　　rested on her shoulders for the last two decades. “It’s about time.”

　　“Congratulations, you two! I have to say you’ve had your mother 
　　really worried. You’re certainly not newlyweds anymore, you know. We 
　　were beginning to wonder . . .” From the head of the table my dad 
　　raised his eyebrows.

　　“Hey guys, that’s great. It’s about time I get to be an aunt. When’s 
　　the little one due?”

　　They both looked dumbfounded, and for a moment I worried that we’d 
　　gotten it all wrong, that their “good” news was that they were 
　　building a newer, bigger Home in that swamp they lived in, or that 
　　Kyle had finally decided to leave his father’s law firm and was 
　　going to join my sister in opening the gallery she’d always dreamed 
　　of. Maybe we’d jumped the gun on this one, been just a little too 
　　eager to hear that a future niece or grandson was on the way. It was 
　　all my parents could talk about lately, incessantly hashing and 
　　rehashing the reasons why my sister and Kyle―already in their 
　　thirties and with four years of marriage behind them―had yet to 
　　reproduce. In the past six months, the subject had progressed from 
　　time-consuming family obsession to perceived crisis.

　　My sister looked worried. Kyle frowned. My parents looked as though 
　　they might both pass out from the silence. The tension was palpable.

　　Jill got out of her chair and walked over to Kyle, where she plopped 
　　herself in his lap. She wrapped her arm behind the back of his neck 
　　and leaned her face next to his, whispering in his ear. I glanced at 
　　my mother, who looked about ten seconds away from unconsciousness, 
　　the worry causing the small lines near her eyes to grow as deep as 
　　trenches.

　　Finally, finally, they giggled, and turned toward the table, and 
　　announced unanimously, “We’re going to have a baby.” And then there 
　　was light. And shrieking. And hugging. My mother flew out of her 
　　seat so fast that she knocked it over and, in turn, tipped over a 
　　potted cactus that rested by the sliding-glass door. My dad grabbed 
　　Jill and kissed her on both cheeks and the top of her head, and for 
　　the first time I could remember since their wedding day, he kissed 
　　Kyle, too.

　　I rapped my Dr. Brown’s black cherry can with a plastic fork and 
　　announced that we needed a toast. “Please raise your glasses, 
　　everyone, raise your glasses to the brand-new Sachs baby that will 
　　be joining our family.” Kyle and Jill looked at me pointedly. “OK, I 
　　guess technically it’s a Harrison baby, but it will be a Sachs at 
　　heart. To Kyle and Jill, future perfect parents to the world’s most 
　　perfect child.” We all clinked soda cans and coffee mugs and toasted 
　　the grinning couple and my sister’s twenty-four-inch waist. I 
　　cleaned up by throwing the entire contents of the table directly 
　　into a garbage bag while my mom tried to pressure Jill to name the 
　　baby after various dead relatives. Kyle sipped Coffee and looked 
　　pleased with himself, and just before midnight my dad and I sneaked 
　　off to his study for a game.

　　He turned up the white-noise machine he used when he had patients 
　　during the day, both to block out the sounds of the household from 
　　them and to keep anyone else in the house from hearing what was 
　　discussed in his office. Like any good shrink, my dad had placed a 
　　gray leather couch in the far corner, so soft I liked to rest my 
　　head on the armrest, and three chairs that angled forward and held a 
　　person in a kind of fabric sling. Womblike, he assured me. His desk 
　　was sleek and black and topped with a flat-screen monitor, and the 
　　matching black leather chair was high-backed and very plush. A wall 
　　of psychology books encased in glass, a collection of bamboo stalks 
　　in a very tall crystal vase on the floor, and some framed colorblock 
　　prints―the only real color in the room―completed the futuristic 
　　look. I flopped on the floor between the couch and his desk, and he 
　　did the same.

　　“So, tell me what’s really going on, Andy,” he said as he handed me 
　　a little wooden tile holder. “I’m sure you’re feeling really 
　　overwhelmed right now.”

　　I picked my seven tiles and carefully arranged them in front of me. 
　　“Yeah, it’s been a pretty crazy couple weeks. First moving, then 
　　starting. It’s a weird place, hard to explain. It’s like, everyone’s 
　　beautiful and thin and wearing gorgeous clothes. And they really do 
　　seem nice enough―everybody’s been really friendly. Almost like 
　　they’re all on serious prescription drugs. I don’t know . . .”

　　“What? What were you going to say?”

　　“I can’t put my finger on it. There’s just this feeling that it’s 
　　all a house of cards that’s going to come crashing down around me. I 
　　can’t shake the feeling that it’s ridiculous to be working for 
　　afashion magazine, you know? The work’s been a little mindless so 
　　far, but I don’t even care. It’s challenging enough because it’s all 
　　new, you know?”

　　He nodded.

　　“I know it’s a ‘cool’ job, but I keep wondering how it’s preparing 
　　me forThe New Yorker . I must just be looking for something to go 
　　wrong, because so far it seems too good to be true. Hopefully, I’m 
　　just crazy.”

　　“I don’t think you’re crazy, sweetie. I think you’re sensitive. But 
　　I have to agree, I think you lucked out with this one. People go 
　　their entire lives and don’t see the things you’ll see this year. 
　　Just think! Your first job out of college, and you’re working for 
　　the most important woman at the most profitable magazine at the 
　　biggest magazine publishing company in the entire world. You’ll get 
　　to watch it all happen, from the top down. If you just keep your 
　　eyes open and your priorities in order, you’ll learn more in one 
　　year than most people in the industry will see in their entire 
　　careers.” He placed his first word in the middle of the board, JOLT.

　　“Not bad for an opening move,” I said and counted its worth, doubled 
　　it because the first word always went on a pink star, and started a 
　　scorecard. Dad: 22 points, Andy: 0. My letters weren’t showing much 
　　promise. I added an A, M, and E to the L and accepted my paltry six 
　　points.

　　“I just want to make sure you give it a fair shake,” he said, 
　　switching his tiles around on his holder. “The more I think about 
　　it, the more I’m convinced this is going to mean big things for 
　　you.”

　　“Well, I sure hope you’re right, because I have enough paper cuts 
　　from wrapping to last a long, long time. There better be more to the 
　　whole thing than that.”

　　“There will be, sweetie, there will be. You’ll see. It might feel 
　　like you’re doing silly stuff, but trust me, you’re not. This is the 
　　start of something fantastic, I can feel it. And I’ve studied up on 
　　your boss. This Miranda sounds like a tough woman, no doubt about 
　　it, but I think you’re going to like her. And I think she’s going to 
　　like you, too.”

　　He placed the word TOWEL down using my E and looked satisfied.

　　“I hope you’re right, Dad. I really hope you’re right.”

　　“She’s the editor in chief ofRunway ―you know, the fashion 
　　magazine?” I whispered urgently into the phone, trying valiantly not 
　　to get frustrated.

　　“Oh, I know which one you mean!” said Julia, a publicity assistant 
　　for Scholastic Books. “Great magazine. I love all those letters 
　　where girls write in their embarrassing period stories. Are those 
　　for real? Do you remember reading the one where―”

　　“No, no, not the one for teenagers. It’s most definitely for grown 
　　women.” In theory, at least. “Have you really never seenRunway ?”Is 
　　it humanly possible that she hasn’t? I wondered. “Anyway, it’s 
　　spelled P-R-I-E-S-T-L-Y. Miranda, yes,” I said with infinite 
　　patience. I wondered how she’d react if she knew I actually had 
　　someone on the line who’d never heard of her. Probably not well.

　　“Well, if you could get back to me as soon as possible, I’dreally 
　　appreciate it,” I told Julia. “And if a senior publicist gets in 
　　anytime soon,please have her call me.”

　　It was a Friday morning in the middle of December and the sweet, 
　　sweet freedom of the weekend was only ten hours away. I had been 
　　trying to convince a fashion-oblivious Julia at Scholastic that 
　　Miranda Priestly really was someone important, someone worth bending 
　　rules and suspending logic for. This proved significantly more 
　　difficult than I had anticipated. How could I have known that I’d 
　　have to explain the weight of Miranda’s position to influence 
　　someone who’d never even heard of the most prestigious fashion 
　　magazine on earth―or its famous editor? In my four short weeks as 
　　Miranda’s assistant, I’d already figured out that such 
　　weight-throwing and favor-currying was merely part of my job, but 
　　usually the person I was attempting to persuade, intimidate, or 
　　otherwise pressure yielded completely at the mere mention of my 
　　infamous boss’s name.

　　Unfortunately for me, Julia worked for an educational publishing 
　　house where someone like Nora Ephron or Wendy Wasserstein was much 
　　likelier to get VIP treatment than someone known for her impeccable 
　　taste in fur. I inherently understood this. I tried to remember all 
　　the way back to a time before I had ever heard of Miranda 
　　Priestly―five weeks earlier―and couldn’t. But I knew that such a 
　　magical time had existed. I envied Julia’s indifference, but I had a 
　　job to do, and she wasn’t helping.

　　The fourth book in that wretched Harry Potter series was due to be 
　　released the next day, a Saturday, and Miranda’s ten-year-old twin 
　　daughters each wanted one. The first copies wouldn’t arrive in 
　　stores until Monday, but I had to have them in my hands on Saturday 
　　morning―mere minutes after they were released from the warehouse. 
　　After all, Harry and the crew had to catch a private flight to 
　　Paris.

　　My thoughts were interrupted by the phone. I picked it up as I 
　　always did now that Emily trusted me enough to speak to Miranda. And 
　　boy, did we speak―probably in the vicinity of two dozen times a day. 
　　Even from afar, Miranda had managed to creep into my life and 
　　completely take over, barking orders and requests and demands at a 
　　rapid-fire pace from sevenA .M. until I was finally allowed to leave 
　　at nineP .M.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah? Hello? Is anyone there? Ahn-dre-ah!” I jumped out of my 
　　seat the moment I heard her pronounce my name. It took a moment to 
　　remember and accept that she was not, in fact, in the office―or even 
　　in the country, and for the time being, at least, I was safe. Emily 
　　had assured me that Miranda was completely unaware that Allison had 
　　been promoted or I had been hired, that these were insignificant 
　　details lost on her. As long as someone answered the phone and got 
　　her what she needed, that person’s actual identity was irrelevent.

　　“I simply do not understand what takes you so long to speak after 
　　you pick up the phone,” she stated. From any other person on earth 
　　that would have sounded whiny, but from Miranda it sounded 
　　appropriately cold and firm. Just like her. “In case you haven’t 
　　been here long enough to notice, when I call, you respond. It’s 
　　actually simple. See? I call. You respond. Do you think you can 
　　handle that, Ahn-dre-ah?”

　　I nodded like a six-year-old who’d just been reprimanded for 
　　throwing spaghetti on the ceiling, even though she couldn’t see me. 
　　I concentrated on not calling her “ma’am,” a mistake I’d made a week 
　　earlier that had almost gotten me fired. “Yes, Miranda. I’m sorry,” 
　　I said softly, head bowed. And for that moment Iwas sorry, sorry 
　　that her words hadn’t registered in my brain three-tenths of a 
　　second faster than they had, sorry that my tardiness in saying 
　　“Miranda Priestly’s office” had taken a fraction of a second longer 
　　than absolutely necessary. Her time was, as I was constantly 
　　reminded, much more important than my own.

　　“All right then. Now, after wasting all that time, may we begin? Did 
　　you confirm Mr. Tomlinson’s reservation?” she asked.

　　“Yes, Miranda, I made a reservation for Mr. Tomlinson at the Four 
　　Seasons at one o’clock.”

　　I could see it coming a mile away. A mere ten minutes earlier she’d 
　　called and ordered me to make a reservation at the Four Seasons and 
　　call Mr. Tomlinson and her driver and the nanny to inform them of 
　　the plans, and now she’d want to rearrange them.

　　“Well, I’ve changed my mind. The Four Seasons is not the appropriate 
　　venue for his lunch with Irv. Reserve a table for two at Le Cirque, 
　　and remember to remind the ma&icirc;tre d’ that they will want to sit in 
　　theback of the restaurant. Not on display in the front.The back . 
　　That’s all.”

　　I had convinced myself when I first spoke with Miranda on the phone, 
　　that by uttering “that’s all,” she really intended those words to 
　　mean “thank you.” By the second week I’d rethought that.

　　“Of course, Miranda.Thank you, ” I said with a smile. I could sense 
　　her pausing on the other end of the line, wondering how to respond. 
　　Did she know I was calling attention to her refusal to say thank 
　　you? Did it seem odd to her that I was thanking her for ordering me 
　　around? I had recently begun thanking her after every one of her 
　　sarcastic comments or nasty phone-in commands, and the tactic was 
　　oddly comforting. She knew I was mocking her somehow, but what could 
　　she say?Ahn-dre-ah, I never want to hear you thank me again. I 
　　forbid you to express your gratitude in such a manner! Come to think 
　　of it, that might not be that much of a stretch.

　　Le Cirque, Le Cirque, Le Cirque,I said over and over in my head, 
　　determined to make that reservation ASAP so I could get back to the 
　　significantly more difficult Harry Potter challenge. The Le Cirque 
　　reservationist immediately agreed to have a table ready for Mr. 
　　Tomlinson and Irv whenever they arrived.

　　Emily walked in a from a stroll around the office and asked me if 
　　Miranda had called at all.

　　“Only three times, and she didn’t threaten to fire me during any of 
　　them,” I said proudly. “Of course, she did intimate it, but she 
　　didn’t all-out threaten. Progress, no?”

　　She laughed in the way she did only when I made fun of myself, and 
　　she asked what Miranda, her guru, had wanted.

　　“Just wanted me to switch around B-DAD’s lunch reservation. Not sure 
　　why I’m doing that when he has his own assistant, but hey, I don’t 
　　ask questions around here.” Mr. Blind, Deaf, and Dumb was our 
　　nickname for Miranda’s third husband. Although to the general public 
　　he appeared to be none of those, those of us in the know were quite 
　　confident he was all three. There was, quite simply, no other 
　　explanation for how a nice guy like him could tolerate living 
　　withher .

　　Next, it was time to call B-DAD himself. If I didn’t call soon, he 
　　may not be able to get to the restaurant in time. He’d flown back 
　　from their vacation for a couple days of Business meetings, and this 
　　lunch with Irv Ravitz―Elias-Clark’s CEO―was among the most 
　　important. Miranda wanted every detail perfect―as though that were 
　　something new. B-DAD’s real name was Hunter Tomlinson. He and 
　　Miranda had gotten married the summer before I started working, 
　　after what I’d heard was a rather unique courtship: she pursued, he 
　　demurred. According to Emily, she’d chased him relentlessly until 
　　he’d yielded from the mere exhaustion of ducking her. She’d left her 
　　second husband (the lead singer of one of the most famous bands from 
　　the late sixties and the twins’ father) with absolutely no warning 
　　before her lawyer delivered the papers, and was married again 
　　precisely twelve days after the divorce was finalized. Mr. Tomlinson 
　　followed orders and moved into her penthouse apartment on Fifth 
　　Avenue. I’d only met Miranda once and I’d never met her new husband, 
　　but I’d logged enough phone hours with each that I felt, 
　　unfortunately, like they were family.

　　Three rings, four rings, five rings . . .hmm, I wonder where his 
　　assistant is? I prayed for an answering machine, since I wasn’t in 
　　the mood for the mindless, friendly chitchat of which B-DAD seemed 
　　so fond. Instead, I got his secretary.

　　“Mr. Tomlinson’s office,” she trilled in her deep southern drawl. 
　　“How may I help you today?”How mah I hep ya tuhday?

　　“Hi, Martha, it’s Andrea. Listen, I don’t need to talk to Mr. 
　　Tomlinson, can you just give him a message for me? I made a 
　　reservation for―”

　　“Darlin’, you know Mr. T. always wants to talk to you. Hold just a 
　　sec.” And before I could protest, I was listening to the elevator 
　　version of “Don’t Worry, Be Happy” by Bobby McFerrin. Perfect. It 
　　was fitting that B-DAD had picked the most annoyingly optimistic 
　　song ever written to entertain callers when they were put on hold.

　　“Andy, is that you, sweetheart?” He asked quietly in his deep, 
　　distinguished voice. “Mr. Tomlinson is going to think you’re 
　　avoiding him. It’s been ages since I’ve had the pleasure of speaking 
　　with you.” A week and a half, to be precise. In addition to his 
　　blindness, deafness, and dumbness, Mr. Tomlinson had the added 
　　irritating habit of constantly referring to himself in the third 
　　person.

　　I took a deep breath. “Hello, Mr. Tomlinson. Miranda asked me to let 
　　you know that lunch is at one today at Le Cirque. She said that 
　　you’d―”

　　“Sweetheart,” he said slowly, calmly. “Enough with all that 
　　plan-making for just a second. Give an old man a moment of pleasure 
　　and tell Mr. Tomlinson all about your life. Will you do that for 
　　him? So tell me, dear, are you happy working for my wife?” Was I 
　　happy working for his wife? Hmm, let’s see here. Are little baby 
　　mammals squealing with glee when a predator swallows them whole?Why 
　　of course, you putz, I’m deliriously happy working for your wife. 
　　When neither of us is busy, we give each other mud masks and gossip 
　　about our love lives. It’s a lot like a slumber party among friends, 
　　if you must know. The whole thing is just one big laugh riot .

　　“Mr. Tomlinson, I love my job and I adore working for Miranda.” I 
　　held my breath and prayed that he’d give it up.

　　“Well, Mr. T. is just thrilled that things are working out.”Great, 
　　asshole, but are youthrilled?

　　“Sounds great, Mr. Tomlinson. Have a great lunch,” I cut him off 
　　before he inevitably asked about my weekend plans, and hung up.

　　I sat back in my chair and gazed across the office suite. Emily was 
　　engrossed in trying to reconcile another one of Miranda’s $20,000 
　　American Express bills, her highly waxed brow furrowed in 
　　concentration. The Harry Potter project loomed ahead of me, and I 
　　had to get moving on it immediately if I ever wanted to get away 
　　this weekend.

　　Lily and I had planned a movie marathon weekend. I was exhausted 
　　from work and she was stressed out from her classes, so we’d 
　　promised to spend the whole weekend parked on her couch and subsist 
　　solely on beer and Doritos. No Snackwells. No Diet Coke. And 
　　absolutely no black pants. Even though we talked all the time, we 
　　hadn’t spent any real time together since I’d moved to the city.

　　We’d been best friends since eighth grade, when I first saw Lily 
　　crying alone at a cafeteria table. She’d just moved in with her 
　　grandmother and started at our school, after it became clear that 
　　her parents weren’t coming Home any time soon. They’d taken off a 
　　few months before to follow the Dead (they’d had her when they were 
　　both nineteen and were more into bong hits than babies), leaving her 
　　behind to be watched over by their whacked-out friends at the 
　　commune in New Mexico (or as Lily preferred, the “collective”). When 
　　they hadn’t returned almost a year later, Lily’s grandmother took 
　　her from the commune (or as Lily’s grandmother preferred, the 
　　“cult”) to live with her in Avon. The day I found her crying alone 
　　in the cafeteria was the day her grandmother had forced her to chop 
　　off her dirty dreadlocks and wear a dress, and Lily was not happy 
　　about it. Something about the way she talked, the way she said, 
　　“That’s so Zen of you,” and “Let’s just decompress,” charmed me, and 
　　we immediately became friends. We’d been inseparable through the 
　　rest of high school, had roomed together for all four years at 
　　Brown. Lily hadn’t yet decided whether she preferred MAC lipstick or 
　　hemp necklaces and was still a little too “quirky” to do anything 
　　totally mainstream, but we complemented each other well. And I 
　　missed her. Because with her first year as a graduate student and my 
　　being a virtual slave, we hadn’t seen a whole lot of each other 
　　lately.

　　I couldn’t wait for the weekend. My fourteen-hour workdays were 
　　registering in my feet, my upper arms, my lower back. Glasses had 
　　replaced the contacts I’d worn for a decade because my eyes were too 
　　dry and tired to accept them anymore. I smoked a pack a day and 
　　subsisted solely on Starbucks (expensed, of course) and takeout 
　　sushi (further expensed). I’d begun losing weight already. The 
　　weight I’d lost from the dysentery had returned briefly, but after 
　　my stint atRunway it had begun to disappear again. Something in the 
　　air there, I suppose, or perhaps it was the intensity with which 
　　food was eschewed in the office. I’d already weathered a sinus 
　　infection and had paled significantly, and it had been only four 
　　weeks. I was only twenty-three years old. And Miranda hadn’t even 
　　been in the office yet. Fuck it. I deserved aweekend .

　　Into this mix leaped Harry Potter, and I wasnot pleased. Miranda had 
　　called this morning. It took only a few moments for her to outline 
　　what she wanted, although it took me forever to interpret it. I 
　　learned quickly that in the Miranda Priestly world, it was better to 
　　do something wrong and spend a great deal of time and money to fix 
　　it than to admit you didn’t understand her convoluted and heavily 
　　accented instructions and ask for clarification. So when she mumbled 
　　something about getting the Harry Potter books for the twins and 
　　having them flown to Paris, intuition alone told me this was going 
　　to interfere with my weekend. When she hung up abruptly a few 
　　minutes later, I looked to Emily with panic.

　　“What, oh, what, did she say?” I moaned, hating myself for being too 
　　scared to ask Miranda to repeat herself. “Why can I not understand a 
　　single word that woman utters? It’s not me, Em. I speak English, 
　　always have. I know she does it to personally drive me crazy.”

　　Emily looked at me with her usual mix of disgust and pity. “Since 
　　the book comes out tomorrow and they’re not here to buy it, she 
　　wants you to pick up two copies and bring them to Teterboro. The jet 
　　will take them to Paris,” she summed up coldly, daring me to comment 
　　on the ludicrousness of the instructions. I was reminded once again 
　　that Emily would do anything―really, anything―if it meant making 
　　Miranda a bit more comfortable. I rolled my eyes and kept quiet.

　　Since I was NOT going to sacrifice a nanosecond of weekend to do her 
　　bidding, and because I had an unlimited amount of money and power 
　　(hers) at my personal disposal, I spent the rest of the day 
　　arranging for Harry Potter to jet his way to Paris. First, a few 
　　words for Julia at Scholastic.

　　Dearest Julia,

　　My assistant, Andrea, tells me that you’re the sweetheart to whom I 
　　should address my most heartfelt appreciation. She has informed me 
　　that you are the single person capable of locating a couple copies 
　　of this darling book for me tomorrow. I want you to know how much I 
　　appreciate your hard work and cleverness. Please know how happy 
　　you’ll make my sweet daughters. And don’t ever hesitate to let me 
　　know if you need anything, anything at all, for a fabulous girl like 
　　yourself.

　　XOXO,

　　Miranda Priestly

　　I forged her name with a perfect flourish (hour upon hour of 
　　practicing with Emily standing over me, instructing me to make the 
　　final “a” a little loopier, had finally paid off), attached the note 
　　to the latest issue ofRunway ―one not yet on the newsstand―and 
　　called for a rush messenger to deliver the entire package to 
　　Scholastic’s downtown office. If this didn’t work, nothing would. 
　　Miranda didn’t care that we forged her signature―it saved her from 
　　bothering with details―but she’d probably be livid to see that I’d 
　　penned something so polite, soadorable, using her name.

　　Three short weeks earlier I would have quickly canceled my plans if 
　　Miranda called and wanted me to do something for her on the 
　　weekends, but I was now experienced―and jaded―enough to bend the 
　　rules a little. Since Miranda and the girls would not themselves be 
　　at the airport in New Jersey whenHarry arrived the following day, I 
　　saw no reason why I had to be the one to deliver him. Acting under 
　　the assumption and prayer that Julia would pull through for me with 
　　a couple copies, I worked out some details. Dial, dial, and within 
　　an hour a plan had emerged.

　　Brian, a cooperative editorial assistant at Scholastic―whom I was 
　　assured would have permission from Julia within a couple hours―would 
　　take Home two office copies ofHarry that evening, so he wouldn’t 
　　have to go back to the office on Saturday. Brian would leave the 
　　books with the doorman of his Upper West Side apartment building, 
　　and I would have a car pick them up the following morning at eleven. 
　　Miranda’s driver, Uri, would then call me on my Cell Phone to 
　　confirm that he’d received the package and was on his way to drop it 
　　at Teterboro airport, where the two books would be transferred to 
　　Mr. Tomlinson’s private jet and flown to Paris. I briefly considered 
　　conducting the entire operation in code to make it resemble a KGB 
　　operation even more, but dropped that when I remembered that Uri 
　　didn’t really speak regular English that well. I had checked to see 
　　how fast the fastest DHL option would have them there, but delivery 
　　couldn’t be guaranteed until Monday, which was obviously 
　　unacceptable. Hence the private plane. If all went as planned, 
　　little Cassidy and Caroline could wake up in their private Parisian 
　　suite on Sunday and enjoy their morning milk while reading about 
　　Harry’s adventures―a full day earlier than all of their friends. It 
　　warmed my heart, it really did.

　　Minutes after the cars had been reserved and all the appropriate 
　　people put on alert, Julia called back. Although it’d be a grueling 
　　task and she was likely to get in trouble, she’d be happy to give 
　　Brian two copies for Ms. Priestly. Amen.

　　“Do you believe he gotengaged ?” Lily asked as she rewound the copy 
　　ofFerris Bueller we’d just finished. “I mean, we’re twenty-three 
　　years old for goodness sake―what’s the rush?”

　　“I know, it does seem weird.” I called from the kitchen. “Maybe Mom 
　　and Dad won’t let him have access to the massive trust fund until 
　　he’s settled down? That’d be enough motivation to put a ring on her 
　　finger. Or maybe he’s just lonely?”

　　Lily looked at me and laughed. “Naturally, he can’t just be in love 
　　with her and ready to spend the rest of his life with her, right? I 
　　mean, we’ve established that that’s totally out of the question, 
　　right?”

　　“Correct. That’s not an option. Try again.”

　　“Well, then, I’m forced to pick curtain number three. He’s gay. He 
　　finally came to the realization himself―even though I’ve known 
　　forever―and realizes that Mom and Dad won’t be able to handle it, so 
　　he’ll cover by marrying the first girl he can find. What do you 
　　think?”

　　Casablancawas next on the list, and Lily fast-forwarded past the 
　　opening credits while I microwaved cups of hot chocolate in the tiny 
　　kitchen of her nonalcove studio in Morningside Heights. We lazed 
　　around straight through Friday night―breaking only to smoke and make 
　　another Blockbuster run. Saturday afternoon found us particularly 
　　motivated, and we managed to saunter down to SoHo for a few hours. 
　　We each bought new tank tops for Lily’s upcoming New Year’s party 
　　and shared an oversize mug of eggnog from a sidewalk café. By the 
　　time we made it back to her apartment on Saturday, we were exhausted 
　　and happy and spent the rest of the night alternating betweenWhen 
　　Harry Met Sally on TNT andSaturday Night Live . It was so thoroughly 
　　relaxing, such a departure from the misery that had become my daily 
　　routine, I’d forgotten all about the Harry Potter mission until I 
　　heard a phone ring on Sunday. Ohmigod, it was Her! I overheard Lily 
　　speaking in Russian to someone, probably a classmate, on her Cell 
　　Phone. Thank you, thank you, thank you, dear lord: it wasn’t Her. 
　　But that still didn’t let me off the hook. It was already Sunday 
　　morning, and I had no idea if those stupid books had found their way 
　　to Paris. I had enjoyed my weekend so much―had actually managed to 
　　relax enough―that I had forgotten to check. Of course, my phone was 
　　on and set to the highest ring level, but I never should’ve waited 
　　for someone to call me with a problem, when of course it’d be too 
　　late to do anything. I should’ve taken preemptive action and 
　　confirmed with everyone involved yesterday that all the steps of our 
　　highly choreographed plan had worked.

　　I dug frantically through my overnight bag, searching for the cell 
　　phone given to me byRunway that would ensure I was always only seven 
　　digits away from Miranda. I finally freed it from a tangle of 
　　underwear at the bottom of the bag and flopped backward on the bed. 
　　The little screen announced immediately that I had no service at 
　　that point, and I knew immediately, instinctively, that she had 
　　called and it had gone directly to voice mail. I hated that Cell 
　　Phone with my entire soul. I even hated my new Bang and Olufsen Home 
　　phone by this point. I hated Lily’s phone, commercials for phones, 
　　pictures of phones in magazines, and I even hated Alexander Graham 
　　Bell. Working for Miranda Priestly caused a number of unfortunate 
　　side effects in my day-to-day life, but the most unnatural one was 
　　my severe and all-consuming hatred of phones.

　　For most people, the ringing of a phone was a welcome sign. Someone 
　　was trying to reach them, to say hello, ask about their well-being, 
　　or make plans. For me, it triggered fear, intense anxiety, and 
　　heart-stopping panic. Some people considered the many available 
　　phone features to be a novelty, even fun. For me, they were nothing 
　　short of imperative. Although I’d never had so much as call waiting 
　　before Miranda, a few days into my tenure atRunway I was signed up 
　　for call waiting (so she’d never get a busy signal), caller ID (so I 
　　could avoid her calls), call waiting with caller ID (so I could 
　　avoid her calls while talking on the other line), and voice mail (so 
　　she wouldn’t know I was avoiding her calls because she’d still hear 
　　an answering machine message). Fifty bucks a month for phone 
　　service―before long distance―seemed a small price to pay for my 
　　peace of mind. Well, not peace of mind exactly; more like early 
　　warning.

　　The Cell Phone afforded me no such barriers. Sure, it had all the 
　　same features as the Home phone, but from Miranda’s point of view 
　　there was simply no reasonwhatsoever for the cell to ever be turned 
　　off. It could never go unanswered. The few reasons for such a 
　　situation that I’d thrown out to Emily when she’d first handed me 
　　the phone―a standardRunway office supply―and told me to always 
　　answer it were quickly eliminated.

　　“What if you were sleeping?” I had stupidly asked.

　　“So get up and answer it,” she’d answered while filing down a 
　　scraggly nail.

　　“Sitting down to a really fancy meal?”

　　“Be like every other New Yorker and talk at the dinner table.”

　　“Getting a pelvic exam?”

　　“They’re not looking in your ears, are they?” All right then. I got 
　　it.

　　I loathed that fucking cell but could not ignore it. It kept me tied 
　　to Miranda like an umbilical cord, refusing to let me grow up or out 
　　or away from my source of suffocation. She calledconstantly, and 
　　like some sick Pavlovian experiment gone awry, my body had begun 
　　responding viscerally to its ring.Brring-brring. Increased heart 
　　rate.Briiiing. Automatic finger clenching and shoulder 
　　tensing.Brriiiiiiiiiiiing. Oh, why won’t she leave me alone, please, 
　　oh, please, just forget I’m alive ―sweat breaks out on my forehead. 
　　This whole glorious weekend I’d never even considered the phone 
　　might not have service and had just assumed it would’ve rung if 
　　there was a problem. Mistake number one. I roamed the couple hundred 
　　square feet until AT&T decided to work again, held my breath, and 
　　dialed into my voice mail.

　　Mom left a cute message wishing me lots of fun with Lily. A friend 
　　from San Francisco found himself on Business in New York that week 
　　and wanted to get together. My sister called to remind me to send a 
　　birthday card to her husband. And there it was, almost unexpected 
　　but not quite, that dreaded British accent ringing in my ears. 
　　“Ahn-dre-ah. It’s Mir-ahnda. It’s nine in the morning on Sunday in 
　　Pah-ris and the girls have not yet received their books. Call me at 
　　the Ritz to assure me that they will arrive shortly. That’s all.” 
　　Click.

　　The bile began to rise in my throat. As usual, the message lacked 
　　all niceties. No hello, good-bye, or thank you. Obviously. But more 
　　than that, it had been left nearly half a day ago, and I had still 
　　not called her back. Grounds for dismissal, I knew, and there was 
　　nothing I could do about it. Like an amateur, I’d assumed my plan 
　　would work perfectly and hadn’t even realized that Uri had never 
　　called to confirm the pickup and drop-off. I scanned through the 
　　address book on my phone and quickly dialed Uri’s Cell Phone number, 
　　another Miranda purchase so that he’d be on call 24/7 as well.

　　“Hi, Uri, it’s Andrea. Sorry to bother you on Sunday, but I was 
　　wondering if you picked up those books yesterday from Eighty-seventh 
　　and Amsterdam?”

　　“Hi, Andy, eet’s so nice to hear your woice,” he crooned in the 
　　thick Russian accent I always found so comforting. He’d been calling 
　　me Andy like a favorite old uncle would since the first time we met, 
　　and coming from him―as opposed to B-DAD―I didn’t mind it. “Of course 
　　I pick up the bouks, just like you say. You tink I don’t vant to 
　　help you?”

　　“No, no, of course not, Uri. It’s just that I got a message from 
　　Miranda saying that they hadn’t received them yet, and I’m wondering 
　　what went wrong.”

　　He was quiet for a moment, and then offered me the name and number 
　　of the pilot who was flying the private jet yesterday afternoon.

　　“Oh, thank you, thank you, thank you,” I said, scribbling the number 
　　down frantically and praying that the pilot would be helpful. “I’ve 
　　got to run. Sorry I can’t talk, but have a great weekend.”

　　“Yes, yes, good veekend to you, Andy. I tink the pilot man will help 
　　you trace the bouks. Nice luck to you,” he said merrily and hung up.

　　Lily was making waffles and I desperately wanted to join her, but I 
　　had to deal with this now or I was out of a job. Or maybe I’d 
　　already been fired, I thought, and no one had even bothered to tell 
　　me. Not outside the realm ofRunway possibility, remembering the 
　　fashion editor who’d been fired while on her honeymoon. She herself 
　　stumbled across her change in job status by reading about it in a 
　　copy ofWomen’s Wear Daily in Bali. I quickly called the number that 
　　Uri had given me for the pilot and thought I’d pass out from 
　　frustration when an answering machine picked up.

　　“Hi, Jonathan? This is Andrea Sachs fromRunway magazine. I’m Miranda 
　　Priestly’s assistant, and I needed to ask you a question about the 
　　flight yesterday. Oh, come to think of it, you’re probably still in 
　　Paris, or maybe on your way back. Well, I just wanted to see if the 
　　books, and uh, well, you of course, made it to Paris in one piece. 
　　Can you call my cell? 917-555-8702. Please, as soon as possible. 
　　Thanks. ’Bye.”

　　I thought about phoning the concierge at the Ritz to see if he’d 
　　remember receiving the car that would have brought the books from 
　　the private airport on the outskirts of Paris but quickly realized 
　　that my cell didn’t dial internationally. It was quite possibly the 
　　only task it was not programmed to handle, and it was, of course, 
　　the only one that mattered. At that moment, Lily announced that she 
　　had a plate of waffles and a cup of Coffee for me. I walked into the 
　　kitchen and took the food. She was sipping a Bloody Mary. Ugh. It 
　　was a Sunday morning. How could she be drinking?

　　“Having a Miranda moment?” she asked with a look of sympathy.

　　I nodded. “Think I screwed up pretty badly this time,” I said, 
　　gratefully accepting the plate. “This one just might get me fired.”

　　“Oh, sweetie, you always say that. She won’t fire you. She hasn’t 
　　even seen you hard at work yet. At least, she better not fire 
　　you―you have the greatest job in the world!”

　　I looked at her warily and willed myself to remain calm.

　　“Well, you do,” she said. “So she sounds difficult to please and a 
　　little crazy. Who isn’t? You still get free shoes and makeovers and 
　　haircuts and clothes. The clothes! Who on earth gets free designer 
　　clothes just for showing up at work each day? Andy, you work 
　　atRunway, don’t you understand? A million girls would kill for your 
　　job.”

　　I understood. I understood right then that Lily, for the first time 
　　since I met her nine years before,didn’t understand. She, like all 
　　my other friends, loved hearing the crazy work stories I’d 
　　accumulated in the past weeks―the gossip and the glamour―but she 
　　didn’t really understand just how hard each day was. She didn’t 
　　understand that the reason I continued to show up, day after day, 
　　was not for the free clothes, didn’t understand that all the free 
　　clothes in the world wouldn’t make this job bearable. It was time to 
　　bring one of my best friends into my world, where, I was quite 
　　certain, shewould understand. She just needed to be told. Yes! It 
　　was time to share with someone exactly what was going on. I opened 
　　my mouth to start, excited at the prospect of having an ally, but my 
　　phone rang.

　　Dammit! I wanted to throw it against the wall, tell whoever was on 
　　the other end to go to hell. But a small part of me hoped it was 
　　Jonathan with some information. Lily smiled and told me to take my 
　　time. I nodded sadly and answered.

　　“Is this Andrea?” asked a man’s voice.

　　“Yes, is this Jonathan?”

　　“It is indeed. I just called Home and got your message. I’m flying 
　　back from Paris right now, somewhere over the Atlantic as we speak, 
　　but you sounded so worried I wanted to call you back right away.”

　　“Thank you! Thank you! I really appreciate it. Yes, I am a bit 
　　worried, because I got a call from Miranda earlier today and it 
　　seems strange that she hadn’t yet received the package. You did give 
　　it to the driver in Paris, right?”

　　“Sure did. You know, miss, in my Business I don’t ask any questions. 
　　Just fly where I’m told and when and try to get everyone there in 
　　one piece. But it’s sure not often I end up flying overseas with 
　　nothing onboard but a package. Must’ve been something real 
　　important, I imagine, like an organ for a transplant or maybe some 
　　classified documents. So yes, I took real good care of that package 
　　and I gave it to the driver, just like I was told. Nice fella from 
　　the Ritz. No problems.”

　　I thanked him and hung up. The concierge at the Ritz had arranged 
　　for a driver to meet Mr. Tomlinson’s private plane at de Gaulle and 
　　transfer Harry back to the hotel. If everything went as planned, 
　　Miranda should’ve had those books by seven in the morning local 
　　time, and considering it was already late afternoon there, I 
　　couldn’t imagine what had gone wrong. There was no choice: I had to 
　　call the concierge, and since my cell wouldn’t dial internationally, 
　　I had to find a phone that did.

　　I took the plate of now cold waffles back to the kitchen and dumped 
　　them in the garbage. Lily was lying on the couch again, half-asleep. 
　　I hugged her good-bye and told her I’d call her later and headed out 
　　to hail a cab back to the office.

　　“What about today?” she whined. “I haveThe American President all 
　　lined up and ready to go. You can’t leave yet―our weekend’s not 
　　over!”

　　“I know, I’m sorry, Lil. I have to deal with this now. There’s 
　　nothing I’d rather do than stay here, but she’s got me on a pretty 
　　short leash right now. I’ll call you later?”

　　The office was, of course, deserted, as everyone was surely 
　　brunching at Pastis with their investment banker boyfriends. I sat 
　　in my darkened area, took a deep breath, and dialed. Blissfully, 
　　Monsieur Renaud, my favorite of the Ritz concierges, was available.

　　“Andrea, dear, how are you? We’re simply delighted to have Miranda 
　　and the twins back with us again so soon,” he lied. Emily told me 
　　that Miranda stayed at the Ritz so frequently that the entire hotel 
　　staff knew her and the girls by name.

　　“Yes, Monsieur Renaud, and I know she’s just thrilled to be there,” 
　　I lied back. No matter how accommodating the poor concierge was, 
　　Miranda found fault with his every move. To his credit, he never 
　　stopped trying, and he never stopped lying about how much he loved 
　　her, either. “Listen, I’m wondering if that car you sent to meet 
　　Miranda’s plane made it back to the hotel already?”

　　“Well of course, dear. That was hours ago. He must’ve returned here 
　　before eight o’clock this morning. I sent the best driver we have on 
　　staff,” he said proudly. If only he knew what his best driver had 
　　been sent to shuttle around town.

　　“Well, that’s so strange, because I got a message from Miranda 
　　saying that she never received the package, but I’ve checked with 
　　the driver here who swears he dropped it at the airport, the pilot 
　　who swears he flew it to Paris and gave it to your driver, and now 
　　you who remember it arriving at the hotel. How could she not have 
　　received it?”

　　“It seems the only way to solve this is to ask the lady herself,” he 
　　trilled in a fake-happy voice. “Why don’t I connect you?”

　　I had hoped against all hope that it wouldn’t come to this, that I’d 
　　be able to identify and fix the problem without having to speak to 
　　her. What would I tell her if she still insisted that she’d never 
　　received the package? Was I supposed to suggest that she look on the 
　　table in her suite, where it was inevitably left hours earlier? Or 
　　was I supposed to go through the whole thing, private jet and all, 
　　and get her two more copies by the end of the day? Or perhaps I 
　　should hire a secret service agent next time to accompany the books 
　　on their journey overseas and ensure that nothing compromises their 
　　safe arrival? Something to think about.

　　“Sure, Monsieur Renaud. Thanks for your help.”

　　A few clicks and the phone was ringing. I was sweating slightly from 
　　the tension, so I wiped my palm on my sweatpants and tried not to 
　　think what would happen if Miranda saw me wearing sweatpants in her 
　　office.Be calm, be confident, I coached myself.She can’t disembowel 
　　me over the phone .

　　“Yes?” I heard from a faraway place, jolting myself out of my 
　　self-help thoughts. It was Caroline who, at a mere ten years, had 
　　perfected her mother’s brusque phone manner perfectly. Cassidy at 
　　least had the courtesy to answer the phone with a “hello.”

　　“Hi, sweetie,” I crooned, hating myself for sucking up to a child. 
　　“It’s Andrea, from the office. Is your mom there?”

　　“You mean mymum ?” she corrected as she always did when I used the 
　　American pronunciation. “Sure, I’ll get her.”

　　A moment or two later, Miranda was on the line.

　　“Yes, Ahn-dre-ah? This had better be important. You know how I feel 
　　about being interrupted when I’m spending time with the girls,” she 
　　stated in her cold, clipped way.You know how I feel about being 
　　interrupted when I’m spending time with the girls? I wanted to 
　　scream.Are you fucking kidding me, lady? You think I’m calling for 
　　my goddamn health? Because I couldn’t bear to go a single weekend 
　　without hearing your miserable voice? And what about me spending 
　　time with mygirls? I thought I’d pass out from anger, but I took a 
　　deep breath and dove right in.

　　“Miranda, I’m sorry if this is a bad time, but I’m calling to ensure 
　　that you received the Harry Potter books. I heard your message 
　　saying that you hadn’t yet received them, but I’ve spoken to 
　　everyone and―”

　　She interrupted me midsentence and spoke slowly and surely. 
　　“Ahn-dre-ah. You should really listen more closely. I said no such 
　　thing. We received the package early this morning. Incidentally, it 
　　came so early that they woke us all up for the silly thing.”

　　I couldn’t believe what I was hearing. I didn’t dream that she’d 
　　left the message, did I? I was still too young even for early-onset 
　　Alzheimer’s, right?

　　“What I said was that we didn’t receiveboth copies of the book, as I 
　　had requested. The package included only one, and I’m sure you can 
　　imagine just how disappointed the girls are. They were really 
　　looking forward to each having theirown copy, as I had requested. I 
　　need you to explain why my orders weren’t followed.”

　　This wasn’t happening. This couldn’t be happening. I was definitely 
　　dreaming now, living some sort of alternate-universe existence where 
　　anything resembling rationality and logic were suspended 
　　indefinitely. I wouldn’t even let myself consider the absurdity of 
　　what was unfolding.

　　“Miranda, I do recall that you requested two copies, and I ordered 
　　two,” I stammered, hating myself yet again for pandering. “I spoke 
　　to the girl at Scholastic and am quite sure that she understood that 
　　you needed two copies of the book, so I can’t imagine―”

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, you know how I feel about excuses. I’m not particularly 
　　interested in hearing yours now. I expect something like this will 
　　never happen again, correct? That’s all.” She hung up.

　　I stood there for what must have been five full minutes, listening 
　　to the squawking off-the-hook sound with the receiver pressed 
　　against my ear. My mind raced, full of questions. Could I kill her? 
　　I wondered, considering the probability of getting caught. Would 
　　they automatically assume it was me? Of course not, I 
　　concluded―everybody, at least atRunway, had a motive. Do I really 
　　have the emotional wherewithal to watch her die a long, slow, 
　　agonizingly painful death? Well, yes, that much was for sure―what 
　　would be the most enjoyable way to snuff out her wretched existence?

　　I slowly replaced the receiver. Could I really have misunderstood 
　　her message when I listened to it earlier? I grabbed my Cell Phone 
　　and replayed the messages.“Ahn-dre-ah. It’s Mir-ahnda. It’s nine in 
　　the morning on Sunday in Pah-ris and the girls have not yet received 
　　their books. Call me at the Ritz to assure me that they will arrive 
　　shortly. That’s all.” Nothing was really wrong. She may have 
　　received one copy instead of two, but she deliberately gave me the 
　　impression that I’d made a tremendous, career-ending mistake. She’d 
　　called with no concern that her nineA .M. call would have reached me 
　　at threeA .M., on my most perfect weekend in months. She’d called to 
　　drive me a little crazier, push me a little bit harder. She’d called 
　　to dare me to defy her. She’d called to make me hate her that much 
　　more.

　　7

　　Lily’s New Year’s party was good and low-key, just a lot of paper 
　　cups of champagne at Lily’s place with a bunch of people from 
　　college and some others they managed to drag along. I was never a 
　　big fan of the holiday. I don’t remember who first called it 
　　“Amateur Night” (I think it was Hugh Hefner), saying that he went 
　　out the other 364 days a year, but I tend to agree. All that forced 
　　drinking and merry-making did not a good time guarantee. So Lily had 
　　stepped up and thrown a little party to save us all the $150 tickets 
　　to some club or, even worse, any sort of ridiculous thoughts of 
　　actually freezing in Times Square. We’d each brought a bottle of 
　　something not too poisonous, and she had passed out noisemakers and 
　　glittery tiaras, and we got quite drunk and happy and toasted in the 
　　New Year on her rooftop overlooking Harlem. Although we’d all had 
　　way too much to drink, Lily was pretty much nonfunctional by the 
　　time everyone else had left. She had already thrown up twice, and I 
　　was scared to leave her alone in the apartment, so Alex and I had 
　　packed her a bag and dragged her in the cab with us. We all stayed 
　　at my place, Lily on the futon in the living room, and went out for 
　　a big brunch the next day.

　　I was glad the whole holiday thing was over. It was time to get on 
　　with my life and get started―really started―on my new job. Even 
　　though it felt like I’d been working for a decade, I was technically 
　　just beginning. I had a lot of hope that things would improve once 
　　Miranda and I started working together day to day. Anyone could be a 
　　cold-hearted monster over the phone, especially someone who was 
　　uncomfortable with vacations and being so far away from work. But I 
　　was convinced that the misery of that first month would give way to 
　　a whole new situation, and I was excited to see how it would all 
　　unfold.

　　It was a little after ten on a cold and gray January 3, and I was 
　　actually happy to be at work. Happy! Emily was gushing about some 
　　guy she met at a New Year’s party in LA, some “superhot, 
　　up-and-coming songwriter” who had promised to come visit her in New 
　　York in the next couple weeks. I was chatting with the associate 
　　beauty editor who sat down the hall, a really sweet guy who’d 
　　graduated from Vassar and whose parents didn’t yet know―even despite 
　　the college choice and the fact that he was abeauty editor at 
　　afashion magazine―that he did, in fact, sleep with guys.

　　“Oh, come with me, please? It’ll be so fun, I promise. I’ll 
　　introduce you to some real hotties, Andy, you’ll see. I have some 
　　gorgeous straight friends. Besides, it’sMarshall ’s party―it’s got 
　　to be great,” James crooned, leaning against my desk as I checked my 
　　e-mail. Emily was chattering away happily on her side of the suite, 
　　detailing her rendezvous with the long-haired singer.

　　“I would, you know I would, but I’ve had these plans with my 
　　boyfriend tonight since before Christmas,” I said. “We’ve been 
　　planning on going out to a really nice dinner together for weeks, 
　　and I canceled on him last time.”

　　“So see him after! Come on, it’s not every day you get a chance to 
　　meet the single most talented colorist in the civilized world, is 
　　it? And there will be loads of celebrities and everyone will look 
　　gorgeous, and, well, I just know it’ll be the most glamorous party 
　　of the week! Harrison and Shriftman is putting it on, for 
　　chrissake―you can’t beat that. Say yes.” He squinted his face into 
　　exaggerated puppy eyes, and I had to laugh.

　　“James, I’d really, really like to―I’ve never even been to the 
　　Plaza! But I really can’t change these plans. Alex made reservations 
　　at this little Italian place right by his apartment and there’s no 
　　way I can reschedule.” I knew I couldn’t cancel, and I didn’t want 
　　to―I wanted to spend the night alone with Alex and hear how his new 
　　after-school program was shaping up, but I was sorry it had to be 
　　the same night as this party. I’d been reading about it in the 
　　papers for the past week: it seemed that all of Manhattan was 
　　ecstatically waiting for Marshall Madden, hair colorist 
　　extraordinaire, to host his annual postCNew Year’s blowout. They 
　　were saying that this year was going to be even bigger than usual 
　　because Marshall had just published a new book,Color Me Marshall . 
　　But I wasn’t going to cancel on my boyfriend to go to some star 
　　party.

　　“Well, OK, but don’t say I never asked you to go anywhere. And don’t 
　　come crying to me when you read inPage Six tomorrow that I was 
　　spotted with Mariah or J-Lo. Just don’t.” And he huffed away, half 
　　joking that he was angry, half not, since he seemed to be in a 
　　perpetual snit anyway.

　　So far, the week after New Year’s had been easy. We were still 
　　unwrapping and cataloging presents―I had gotten to unveil the most 
　　stunning pair of Swarovski-encrusted stilettos this morning―but 
　　there were none left to send and the phones were quiet since many 
　　people were still away. Miranda would be returning from Paris at the 
　　end of the week but wouldn’t be in the office until Monday. Emily 
　　felt confident that I was ready to handle her, and so was I. We’d 
　　run through everything, and I’d taken nearly an entire legal pad 
　　full of notes. I glanced down at it, hoping I’d remember everything. 
　　Coffee: Starbucks only, tall latte, two raw sugars, two napkins, one 
　　stirrer. Breakfast: Mangia delivery, 555C3948, one soft cheese 
　　Danish, four slices bacon, two sausage links. Newspapers: newsstand 
　　in lobby,New York Times, Daily News, New York Post, theFinancial 
　　Times, theWashington Post, USA Today, theWall Street Journal, 
　　Women’s Wear Daily, and theNew York Observer on Wednesdays. Weekly 
　　magazines, available Mondays:Time, Newsweek, U.S. News, The New 
　　Yorker (!),Time Out New York, New York, theEconomist . And on and on 
　　it went, listing her favorite flowers and her most-hated flowers, 
　　her doctors’ names and addresses and Home phone numbers, her 
　　household help, her snack preferences, her preferred bottled water, 
　　every size she wore in every article of clothing from lingerie to 
　　ski boots. I made lists of people she wanted to talk to (Always), 
　　and separate lists for people she never wanted to talk to (Never). I 
　　wrote and wrote and wrote as Emily revealed these things throughout 
　　our weeks together, and when we were finished, I felt there was 
　　nothing I did not know about Miranda Priestly. Except, of course, 
　　what exactly made her so important that I’d filled a legal pad with 
　　likes and dislikes. Why, exactly, was I supposed to care?

　　“Yeah, he’s amazing,” Emily was sighing, twisting the phone cord 
　　round and round her forefinger. “It was the most romantic weekend I 
　　think I’ve ever had.”

　　Ping! You have a new e-mail from Alexander Fineman. Click here to 
　　open. Oooh, fun. Elias-Clark had firewalled instant messenger, but 
　　for some reason I could still receive instant notifications that I’d 
　　received a new e-mail. I’d take it.

　　Hey baby, how’s your day?? Things are crazy here, as usual. Remember 
　　I told you that Jeremiah had threatened all the little girls with a 
　　box cutter he’d brought from Home? Well, it seems he was serious―he 
　　brought another one to school today and sliced one of the girls’ 
　　arms at recess and called her a bitch. Not a deep cut at all, but 
　　when the teacher on duty asked him where he’d gotten such an idea, 
　　he said he saw his mom’s boyfriend do it to his mom. He’s six years 
　　old, Andy, can you believe it? Anyway, the principal called an 
　　emergency faculty meeting tonight, so I’m afraid I can’t make 
　　dinner. I’m so sorry! But I have to say, I’m happy that they’re 
　　responding to this at all―it’s more than I had hoped for. You 
　　understand, don’t you? Please don’t be mad. I’ll call you later, and 
　　I promise to make it up to you. Love, A

　　Please don’t be mad? I hope you understand? One of his 
　　fourth-graders hadslashed another student and he was hoping I’d be 
　　OK with him canceling dinner? I’d canceled on him my first week 
　　because I’d thought my week of riding around in a limo and wrapping 
　　presents had been too demanding. I wanted to cry, to call him and 
　　tell him it was more than OK, that I was proud of him for caring 
　　about these kids, for taking the job in the first place. I hit 
　　“reply” and was just about to write as much when I heard my name.

　　“Andrea! She’s on her way in. She’ll be here in ten minutes,” Emily 
　　announced loudly, obviously struggling to remain calm.

　　“Hmm? I’m sorry, I didn’t hear what―”

　　“Miranda is on her way into the office this moment. We need to get 
　　ready.”

　　“On her way into the office? But I thought she wasn’t even coming 
　　back to the country until Saturday . . .”

　　“Well, clearly she changed her mind. Now, move! Go downstairs and 
　　get her papers and lay them out just the way I told you. When you’re 
　　done, wipe down her desk and leave a glass of Pellegrino on the 
　　left-hand side, with ice and a lime. And make sure that her bathroom 
　　is stocked, OK? Go! She’s already in the car, so she should be here 
　　in less than ten minutes, depending on traffic.”

　　As I raced out of the office, I could hear Emily rapid-fire dialing 
　　four-digit extensions and all but screaming, “She’s on her way―tell 
　　everyone.” It took me only three seconds to wind through the 
　　hallways and pass through the fashion department, but I already 
　　heard panicked cries of “Emily said she’s on her way in” and 
　　“Miranda’s coming!” and a particularly blood-curdling cry of 
　　“She’sbaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaack !” Assistants were frantically 
　　straightening clothes on the racks that lined the halls, and editors 
　　were racing into their offices, where I could see one changing from 
　　her kitten-heeled shoes to four-inch stilettos while another lined 
　　her lips, curled her lashes, and adjusted her bra strap without so 
　　much as slowing down. As the publisher walked out of the men’s room, 
　　I glanced past him and saw James, looking frenzied, checking his 
　　black cashmere sweater for lint while spastically popping Altoids in 
　　his mouth. Unless the men’s room was wired with loudspeakers for 
　　these very occasions, I wasn’t even sure how he’d heard yet.

　　I was dying to stop and watch the scene unfold, but I had less than 
　　ten minutes to prepare for my first meeting with Miranda as her 
　　actual assistant, and I wasn’t going to blow it. Until then I’d been 
　　trying not to appear as if I’d been actually running, but upon 
　　witnessing the utter lack of dignity everyone else had demonstrated, 
　　I broke into a sprint.

　　“Andrea! You know Miranda’s on her way here, don’t you?” Sophy 
　　called from the reception desk as I flew by.

　　“Yeah, I know, but how do you know?”

　　“Sweetie pie, I know everything. Now I suggest you get your butt in 
　　gear. One thing’s for sure: Miranda Priestly doesnot like to be kept 
　　waiting.”

　　I leapt onto the elevator and called out a thank you. “I’ll be back 
　　in three minutes with the papers!”

　　The two women on the elevator stared at me in disgust, and I 
　　realized that I had been screaming.

　　“Sorry,” I said, trying to catch my breath. “We just found out that 
　　our editor in chief is on her way to the office and we weren’t 
　　prepared, so everyone’s a little edgy now.”Why am I explaining 
　　myself to these people?

　　“Ohmigod, you must work for Miranda! Wait, let me guess. You’re 
　　Miranda’s new assistant? Andrea, right?” The leggy brunette flashed 
　　what must’ve been four dozen teeth and moved forward like a piranha. 
　　Her friend instantly brightened.

　　“Um, yeah. Andrea,” I said, repeating my own name as though I wasn’t 
　　entirely sure it was mine. “And yes, I’m Miranda’s new assistant.”

　　At that moment the elevator hit the lobby and the doors opened to 
　　the stark white marble. I moved ahead of the women and bolted 
　　through before the doors had opened entirely and heard one of them 
　　call, “You’re a lucky girl, Andrea. Miranda’s an amazing woman, and 
　　a million girls would die for your job!”

　　I tried not to slam into a group of very unhappy-looking lawyers, 
　　and nearly flew into the newsstand in the corner of the lobby, where 
　　a little Kuwaiti man named Ahmed presided over a sleek display of 
　　glossy titles and a noticeably sparser array of mostly sugar-free 
　　candy and diet sodas. Emily had introduced Ahmed and me to each 
　　other before Christmas as part of my training, and I was hoping he 
　　could be enlisted to help me now.

　　“Stop right there!” he cried as I began pulling newspapers out of 
　　their wire racks by the register. “You are Miranda’s new girl, 
　　right? Come here.”

　　I swiveled to see Ahmed lean down and ferret under the register, his 
　　face turning a bit too red under the strain. “Ah-ha!” he cried 
　　again, springing to his feet with all the agility of an old man with 
　　two broken legs. “For you. So you don’t make a mess of my display, I 
　　keep them aside for you each day. And maybe to make sure I don’t run 
　　out, too.” He winked.

　　“Ahmed, thank you. I can’t even tell you how much this helps me. Do 
　　you think I should get the magazines now, too?”

　　“I sure do. Look, it’s already Wednesday and they all came out on 
　　Monday. Your boss probably don’t like that so much,” he said 
　　knowingly. And again he reached under the register and again he rose 
　　with an armful of magazines, which, after a quick glance, I 
　　confirmed were all the ones on my list―no more, no less.

　　ID card, ID card, where the hell was that goddamn ID card? I reached 
　　inside my starched white button-down and found the silk lanyard that 
　　Emily had fashioned for me out of one of Miranda’s white Hermès 
　　scarves. “Never actually wear the card when she’s around, of 
　　course,” she had said, “but just in case you forget to take it off, 
　　at least you won’t be wearing it on a plastic chain.” She had 
　　practically spit out the last two words.

　　“Here you go, Ahmed. Thank you so much for your help, but I’m in a 
　　big, big rush. She’s on her way in.”

　　He swiped my card down the reader on the side of the machine and 
　　placed the scarf lanyard around my neck like a lei. “Run, now. Run!”

　　I grabbed the overflowing plastic bag and ran, pulling my ID card 
　　out again to swipe against the security turnstiles that would allow 
　　me to enter the Elias-Clark elevator bank. I swiped and pushed. 
　　Nothing. I swiped and pushed again, this time harder. Nothing.

　　“Some boys kiss me, some boys hug me, I think they’re 
　　okay-ay,”Eduardo, the round and slightly sweaty security guard, 
　　began singing in a high-pitched voice from behind the security desk. 
　　Shit. I already knew without looking that his smile, conspiratorial 
　　and enormous, demanded again―as it had every single day for the past 
　　few weeks―that I play along. It seems he had a never-ending supply 
　　of annoying tunes that he loved to sing, and he wouldn’t let me 
　　through the turnstiles until I acted them out. The day before was 
　　“I’m Too Sexy.” As he sang,“I’m too sexy for Milan, too sexy for 
　　Milan, New York and Japan,” I had to walk down the lobby’s imaginary 
　　runway. It could be fun when I was in a decent mood. Sometimes it 
　　even made me smile. But it was my very first day with Miranda, and I 
　　couldn’t be late getting her things set up, I just couldn’t. I 
　　wanted tohurt him for holding me up as everyone else breezed past 
　　the security desk in the turnstiles on each side of me.

　　“If they don’t give me proper credit, I just walk away-ay,”I 
　　muttered, allowing the words to stretch and fade, just like Madonna.

　　He raised his eyebrows. “Where’s the enthusiasm, girlfriend?”

　　I thought I’d do something violent if I heard his voice again, so I 
　　dropped my bag of papers on the counter, threw both arms up in the 
　　air and thrust my hips to the left, while pursing my lips into a 
　　dramatic pout.“A material! A material! A material! A material . . . 
　　WORLD!” I all but screamed, and he cackled and clapped andwhoosh ! 
　　He buzzed me through.

　　Mental note: Discuss with Eduardo when and where it is appropriate 
　　to make a complete ass of me.Once again, I dove onto the elevators 
　　and raced past Sophy, who kindly opened the doors to the floor 
　　without my even asking. I even remembered to stop in one of the 
　　minikitchens and put some ice in one of the Baccarat goblets we kept 
　　in a special cabinet over the microwave just for Miranda. Glass in 
　　one hand, newspapers in another, I peeled around the corner and 
　　smashed directly into Jessica, a.k.a. Manicure Girl. She looked both 
　　annoyed and panic-stricken.

　　“Andrea, are you aware that Miranda is on her way to the office?” 
　　she asked, looking me up and down.

　　“Sure am. I’ve got her newspapers right here and her water right 
　　here, and now I just need to get them back to her office. If you’ll 
　　excuse me . . .”

　　“Andrea!” she called as I ran past her, an ice cube flying out of 
　　the glass and landing outside the art department. “Remember to 
　　change your shoes!”

　　I stopped dead in my tracks and looked down. I was wearing a pair of 
　　funky street sneakers, the kind that weren’t designed to do anything 
　　but look cool. The rules of dress―unspoken and otherwise―were 
　　obviously relaxed when Miranda was away, and even though every 
　　single person in the office looked fantastic, each was wearing 
　　something they would swear up and down that they’d never, ever wear 
　　in front of Miranda. My bright red, mesh sneakers were a prime 
　　example.

　　I had broken a sweat by the time I made it back to our suite. “I’ve 
　　got all the papers and I bought the magazines, too, just in case. 
　　The only thing is, I don’t think I can wear these shoes, can I?”

　　Emily tore the headset from her ear and flung it down on her desk. 
　　“No, of course you can’t wear those.” She picked up the phone, 
　　dialed four digits, and announced, “Jeffy, bring me a pair of 
　　Jimmy’s in a size . . .” She looked at me.

　　“Nine and a half.” I pulled a small bottle of Pellegrino out of the 
　　closet and filled the glass.

　　“Nine and a half. No, now. No, Jeff, I’m serious. Right now. Andrea 
　　is wearingsneakers for chrissake,red sneakers, and She’s going to be 
　　here any minute. OK, thanks.”

　　It was then I noticed that in the four minutes I’d been downstairs, 
　　Emily had managed to switch her faded jeans to leather pants and her 
　　own funky sneakers to open-toe stilettos. She’d also cleaned up the 
　　entire office suite, sweeping the contents of both our desks into 
　　drawers and stashing all of the incoming gifts that hadn’t yet been 
　　transferred to Miranda’s apartment in the closet. She had slicked on 
　　a fresh coat of lip gloss and added some color to her cheeks and was 
　　presently motioning for me to get moving.

　　I grabbed the bag of newspapers and shook them out in a pile on the 
　　lightbox in her office, a sort of underlit table where Emily said 
　　Miranda would stand for hours on end and examine film that had come 
　　in from photo shoots. But it was also where she liked her papers 
　　arranged, and once again, I consulted my legal pad for the correct 
　　order. First, theNew York Times, followed by theWall Street Journal, 
　　and then theWashington Post . And on and on the order went in a 
　　pattern I couldn’t distinguish, each placed slightly on top of the 
　　one before it until they fanned out across the table in 
　　formation.Women’s Wear Daily was the single exception: this was to 
　　be placed in the middle of her desk.

　　“She’s here! Andrea, come out here! She’s on her way up,” I heard 
　　Emily hiss from the outer area. “Uri just called to tell me he just 
　　dropped her off.”

　　I putWWD on her desk, placed the Pellegrino on a corner of her desk 
　　on a linen napkin (which side? I couldn’t remember which side it was 
　　supposed to go on), and darted from the office, taking one last look 
　　around to ensure that everything was in order. Jeffy, one of the 
　　fashion assistants who helped organize the fashion closet, tossed me 
　　a shoe box with a rubber band around it and bolted. I pulled it open 
　　immediately. Inside were a pair of Jimmy Choo heels with straps made 
　　of camel hair going every which way and buckles nestled in the 
　　middle of it all, probably worth around eight hundred dollars. Shit! 
　　I had to get these on. I yanked off my sneakers and my now sweaty 
　　socks and tossed them under my desk. The right one went on rather 
　　easily, but I couldn’t work my stubby fingernail to free the buckle 
　　on the left one until―there! I pried it open and thrust my left foot 
　　into it, watching the straps bite into the already swollen flesh. In 
　　another few seconds I had it buckled and was returning to an upright 
　　sitting position just as Miranda walked in.

　　Frozen. I was absolutely frozen in midmotion, my mind working fast 
　　enough to understand how ridiculous I must look, but not quite fast 
　　enough to move. She noticed me immediately, probably because she was 
　　expecting Emily to still be sitting at her old desk, and walked 
　　over. She leaned on the counter that ran over my desk, leaned over 
　　it and even closer to me, until she was able to see my entire body 
　　as I sat, immobilized, in the chair. Her bright blue eyes moved up 
　　and down, side to side, all over my white button-down, my red 
　　corduroy Gap miniskirt, my now buckled camel-hair Jimmy Choo 
　　sandals. I felt her examine every inch of me, skin and hair and 
　　clothes, her eyes moving so quickly but her face remaining frozen. 
　　She leaned closer still, until her face was only a foot from mine 
　　and I could smell the fantastic aroma of salon shampoo and expensive 
　　perfume, so close that I could see the very fine lines around her 
　　mouth and eyes that were invisible from a more comfortable distance. 
　　But I couldn’t look too long at her face, because she was intently 
　　examining mine. There wasn’t the slightest indication that she 
　　recognized that a) we had, in fact, met before; b) I was her new 
　　employee; or c) I was not Emily.

　　“Hello, Ms. Priestly,” I squeaked impulsively, even though somewhere 
　　in the back of my head I knew that she hadn’t uttered a word yet. 
　　But the tension was unbearable, and I couldn’t help but barrel 
　　forward. “I’m so excited to be working for you. Thank you so much 
　　for the opportunity to . . .”Shut up! Just shut your stupid mouth! 
　　Talk about no dignity.

　　She walked away. Finished looking me up and down, pushed backward 
　　off the counter, and just walked away while I was stuttering 
　　mid-sentence. I could feel heat coming off my face, a flush of 
　　confusion and pain and humiliation all wrapped into one, and it 
　　didn’t help that I could feel Emily glaring at me. I pulled my hot 
　　face upward and confirmed that Emily was indeed glaring at me.

　　“Is the Bulletin updated?” Miranda asked to no one in particular as 
　　she walked into her office and, I noticed happily, directly to the 
　　light table where I’d arranged her papers.

　　“Yes, Miranda. Here it is,” Emily said obsequiously, racing in 
　　behind her and handing her the clipboard where we kept all of 
　　Miranda’s messages typed as they come in.

　　I sat quietly, watching Miranda move deliberately around her office 
　　in the picture frames that hung on her wall: if I looked at the 
　　glass instead of at the photos themselves, I could see her 
　　reflection. Emily immediately busied herself at her desk, and 
　　silence prevailed.Do we never get to talk to each other or anyone 
　　else if she’s in the office? I wondered. I wrote a quick e-mail to 
　　Emily, asking her as much, which I saw her receive and read. Her 
　　answer came back right away:You got it, she wrote.If you and I have 
　　to talk, we whisper. Otherwise, no talking. And don’t EVER speak to 
　　her unless she speaks to you. And do not EVER call her Ms. 
　　Priestly―it’s Miranda. Got it? I felt again as if I had been 
　　slapped, but I looked up and nodded. And it was then I noticed the 
　　coat. It was right there, a great big pile of fabulous-looking fur, 
　　all bunched up on the end of my desk, with one arm dangling off the 
　　edge. I looked at Emily. She rolled her eyes, waved her hand toward 
　　the closet, and mouthed, “Hang it up!” It was as heavy as a wet down 
　　comforter coming out of the washing machine, and I needed both hands 
　　to keep it from dragging on the floor, but I gingerly hung it on one 
　　of the silk hangers and gently, quietly, closed the doors.

　　I hadn’t even sat back down when Miranda appeared next to me, and 
　　this time her eyes were free to roam over my entire body. Impossible 
　　as it seemed, I could feel each body part ignite as she eyed it, but 
　　I was frozen, unable to dive back to my chair. Just as my hair was 
　　about to catch fire, those relentless blue eyes finally stopped on 
　　mine.

　　“I’d like my coat,” she said quietly, looking directly at me, and I 
　　wondered if she wondered who I was, or if she didn’t notice or care 
　　that there was a relative stranger posing as her assistant. There 
　　wasn’t so much as a glimmer of recognition, even though my interview 
　　with her had taken place a few weeks earlier.

　　“Surely,” I managed, and moved toward the closet again, which was an 
　　awkward maneuver because she was currently standing between it and 
　　me. I turned my body sideways to keep from bumping into her and 
　　tried to slide myself past her, reaching to pull open the door I had 
　　just shut. She didn’t move a single inch to let me pass, and I could 
　　feel that the eyes had continued their roving. Finally, blessedly, 
　　my hands closed around the fur, and I pulled it carefully to 
　　freedom. I wanted to throw it at her and see if she’d catch it, but 
　　I restrained myself at the last second and held it open as a 
　　gentleman would for a lady. She shrugged into it with one graceful 
　　motion and picked up her Cell Phone, the only item she had brought 
　　with her to the office.

　　“I’d like the Book tonight, Emily,” she said as she walked 
　　confidently out of the office, probably not even noticing that a 
　　cluster of three women standing in the hall outside the suite 
　　scattered immediately upon seeing her, chins to their chests.

　　“Yes, Miranda. I’ll have Andrea bring it up.”

　　That was that. She left. And the visit that had inspired office-wide 
　　panic, frenzied preparations, even makeup and wardrobe adjustments, 
　　had lasted just under four minutes, and had taken place―as far as my 
　　inexperienced eyes could see―for absolutely no reason whatsoever.

　　8

　　“Don’t look now,” James said, his mouth as immobile as a 
　　ventriloquist’s, “but I spy Reese Witherspoon at three o’clock.”

　　I swiveled immediately as he cringed in embarrassment, and, sure 
　　enough, there she was, sipping a glass of champagne and throwing her 
　　head back in laughter. I didn’t want to be impressed, but I couldn’t 
　　help it: she was one of my favorite actresses.

　　“James, darling, I’m so glad you could make it to my little party,” 
　　quipped a thin, beautiful man who came up behind us. “And who do we 
　　have here?” They kissed.

　　“Marshall Madden, color guru, this is Andrea Sachs. Andrea is 
　　actually―”

　　“Miranda’s new assistant,” Marshall finished, smiling at me. “I’ve 
　　heard all about you, little one. Welcome to the family. I do hope 
　　you’ll come visit me. I promise that together we can, um, smooth 
　　over your look.” He ran his hand lovingly over my scalp and picked 
　　up the ends of my hair, which he immediately held up against the 
　　roots. “Yes, just a touch of something honey-colored and you’ll be 
　　the next supermodel. Get my number from James, OK, sweetie, and come 
　　see me anytime you get a minute. Probably easier said than done!” he 
　　sang as he floated toward Reese.

　　James sighed and looked on wistfully. “He’s a master,” he breathed, 
　　“simply the best. The ultimate. A man among boys, to say the least. 
　　And gorgeous.” A man among boys? Funny. Whenever anyone had used 
　　that phrase before, I’d always pictured Shaquille O’Neal making a 
　　move toward the hoop against a small power forward―not a colorist.

　　“He’s definitely gorgeous, I’ll agree with you there. Have you ever 
　　dated him?” It seemed like the perfect match: the associate beauty 
　　editor ofRunway dating the most sought-after colorist in the free 
　　world.

　　“I wish. He’s been with the same guy for four years now. Do you 
　　believe it? Four years. Since when are hot gay men allowed to be 
　　monogamous? It’s just not fair!”

　　“Hey, I hear you. Since when are hot straight men allowed to be 
　　monogamous? Well, unless they’re being monogamous with me, that is.” 
　　I took a long drag from my cigarette and blew out a near-perfect 
　　smoke ring.

　　“So admit it, Andy. Tell me you’re glad you came tonight. Tell me 
　　this isn’t the greatest party ever,” he said, smiling.

　　I’d grudgingly decided to go with James after Alex had canceled, 
　　mostly because he wouldn’t leave me alone. It seemed utterly 
　　impossible that a single interesting thing would transpire at a 
　　party for a book about highlights, but I had to admit that I’d been 
　　surprised. When Johnny Depp had come over to say hi to James, I was 
　　shocked that he not only seemed to have a full command of the 
　　English language, but had even managed a few funny jokes. And it was 
　　intensely gratifying to see that Gisele, the Ittest It girl of all 
　　current It girls, was downright short. Of course it would’ve been 
　　even nicer to discover that she was secretly squat, too, or had a 
　　major acne problem that had all been airbrushed out in her gorgeous 
　　cover shoots, but I’d settle for short. All in all, it hadn’t been a 
　　bad hour and a half so far.

　　“I’m not sure I’d go that far,” I said, leaning toward him to catch 
　　a glimpse of a great looking guy who appeared to be sulking in the 
　　corner near the book table. “But it hasn’t been quite as disgusting 
　　as I’d imagined. And besides, I’m up for anything after the day I’ve 
　　had.”

　　After Miranda had made her rather abrupt departure after her rather 
　　abrupt arrival, Emily informed me that that night would be the first 
　　time I would have to bring “the Book” to Miranda’s apartment. The 
　　Book was a large wire-bound collection of pages as big as a 
　　phonebook, in which each current issue ofRunway was mocked up and 
　　laid out. She explained that no substantial work could get done each 
　　day until after Miranda left, because all of the art people and 
　　editorial people spent all day long consulting with her, and she 
　　changed her mind every hour. Therefore, when Miranda left around 
　　five each day to spend some time with the twins, the real day’s work 
　　would begin. The art department would craft their new layout and 
　　input any new photos that had come in, and editorial would tweak and 
　　print any copy that had finally, finally, gotten Miranda’s 
　　approval―a giant, looping “MP” scrawled across the entire first 
　　page. Every editor would send all the day’s new changes to the art 
　　assistant, who, hours after nearly everyone else had left, would run 
　　the images and layouts and words through a small machine that waxed 
　　the backs of the pages and pressed them onto their appropriate page 
　　in the Book. It was then my job to take the Book up to Miranda’s 
　　apartment whenever it was finished―anywhere in the eight to elevenP 
　　.M. range, depending on where in the production process we were―at 
　　which point she’d mark it all up. She’d bring it back the next day, 
　　and the entire staff would go through the whole thing again.

　　When Emily overheard me tell James that I’d go to the party with him 
　　after all, she jumped right in. “Um, you know you can’t go anywhere 
　　until the Book’s finished, right?”

　　I stared. James looked as though he might tackle her.

　　“Yeah, I have to say, this is the part of your job I’m most happy to 
　　be done with. It can get really, really late sometimes, but Miranda 
　　needs to see it every single night, you know. She works from Home. 
　　Anyway, I’ll wait with you tonight and show you how to do it, but 
　　then you’re on your own.”

　　“OK, thanks. Any idea when it’ll be finished tonight?”

　　“Nope. Changes every night. You’d really have to ask the art 
　　department.”

　　The Book was finally ready on the earlier side, at eight-thirty, and 
　　after I’d retrieved it from an exhausted-looking art assistant, 
　　Emily and I walked down to 59th Street together. Emily was holding 
　　an armful of freshly dry-cleaned clothes on hangers, encased in 
　　plastic, and she explained to me that dry cleaning always 
　　accompanied the Book. Miranda would bring her dirty clothes to the 
　　office, where, as my luck would have it, it was my job to call the 
　　cleaners and let them know we had a pickup. They would send someone 
　　to the Elias-Clark building immediately, pick up the clothes, and 
　　return them in perfect condition a day later. We stored them in our 
　　office closet until we could either hand them off to Uri or take 
　　them to her apartment ourselves. My job was getting more 
　　intellectually stimulating by the minute!

　　“Hey, Rich!” Emily called brightly, fakely, to the pipe-chomping 
　　dispatcher I’d met my first day. “This is Andrea. She’ll be taking 
　　the Book every night, so make sure she gets a good car, OK?”

　　“Will do, Red.” He pulled the pipe out of his mouth and motioned 
　　toward me. “I’ll take good care of Blondie over here.”

　　“Great. Oh, and can you have another car follow us to Miranda’s? 
　　Andrea and I are going separate places after we drop off the Book.”

　　Two massive Town Cars pulled up just at that moment, and the mammoth 
　　driver in the first car barreled out of the front seat and opened 
　　the back door for us. Emily climbed in first, immediately whipped 
　　out her Cell Phone, and called out, “Miranda Priestly’s apartment, 
　　please.” He nodded and threw the car in gear and we were off.

　　“Is it always the same driver?” I asked, wondering how he knew where 
　　to go.

　　She motioned me to be quiet as she left a message for her roommate. 
　　She then said, “No, but there are only so many drivers who work for 
　　the company. I’ve had them all at least twenty times, so they know 
　　their way by now.” She went back to her dialing. I looked behind us 
　　and saw the second empty Town Car carefully mimicking our turns and 
　　stops.

　　We pulled up in front of a typical Fifth Avenue doorman building: 
　　immaculate sidewalk, well-kept balconies, and what looked like a 
　　gorgeous, warmly lit lobby. A man in a tuxedo and hat immediately 
　　came to the car and opened the door for us, and Emily got out. I 
　　wondered why we weren’t just going to leave the Book and the clothes 
　　with him. As far as I understood―and it wasn’t a lot, especially 
　　when it came to this strange city―that’s what doormen were for. As 
　　in, that’s their job. But Emily pulled a leather Louis Vuitton key 
　　chain from her Gucci logo tote and handed it to me.

　　“I’ll wait here. You take the stuff up to her apartment, Penthouse 
　　A. Just open her door and leave the book on the table in the foyer 
　　and hang the clothes on the hooks by the closet. Notin the closet,by 
　　the closet. And then just leave. Whatever you do, don’t knock or 
　　ring the doorbell. She doesn’t like to be disturbed. Just let 
　　yourself in and out and be quiet!” She handed me the tangle of wire 
　　hangers and plastic and opened her Cell Phone again.All right, I can 
　　handle this. Why so much drama for a book and some pants?

　　The elevator man smiled kindly at me and silently pressed the PH 
　　button after turning a key. He looked like a battered wife, dejected 
　　and sad, as though he couldn’t fight any longer and had just made 
　　peace with his unHappiness.

　　“I’ll wait here,” he said softly, staring at the floor. “You 
　　shouldn’t be more than a minute.”

　　The carpet in the hallways was a deep burgundy color, and I almost 
　　toppled over when one of my heels got stuck in the loops. The walls 
　　were papered in a thick, cream-colored fabric that had tiny cream 
　　pinstripes running the length, and there was a suede cream bench 
　　pushed against the wall. The French doors directly in front of me 
　　said PH B, but I swiveled and saw identical doors with PH A. It took 
　　every ounce of restraint not to ring the bell, but I remembered 
　　Emily’s warning and slid the key in the lock. It clicked right away, 
　　and before I could fix my hair or wonder what was on the other side, 
　　I was standing in a large, airy foyer and smelling the most amazing 
　　scent of lamb chops. And there she was, delicately bringing a fork 
　　to her mouth while two identical, black-haired little girls yelled 
　　at each other across the table and a tall, rugged-looking man with 
　　silver hair and a broad, face-encompassing nose read a newspaper.

　　“Mum, tell her that she can’t just walk in my room and take my 
　　jeans! She won’t listen to me,” one of them pleaded of Miranda, 
　　who’d set down her fork and was taking a sip of what I knew to be 
　　Pellegrino with a lime, from theleft side of the table.

　　“Caroline, Cassidy, enough. I simply don’t want to hear it anymore. 
　　Tomas, bring out some more mint jelly,” she called. A man I presumed 
　　to be the chef hurried into the room holding a silver bowl on a 
　　silver serving platter.

　　And then I realized that I’d been standing there for nearly thirty 
　　seconds, observing them all having dinner. They hadn’t seen me yet, 
　　but would as soon as I moved toward the hall table. I did so 
　　gingerly but felt them all turn to look. Just as I was about to 
　　offer some sort of greeting, I remembered making a gigantic ass out 
　　of myself at our first meeting earlier today, stammering and 
　　stumbling like an idiot, and I kept my mouth shut.Table, table, 
　　table . There it was.Deposit book on table . And now for the 
　　clothes. I looked around frantically for the place I was supposed to 
　　hang the dry cleaning, but I couldn’t focus. The dinner table had 
　　grown silent, and I could feel them all watching me. No one said 
　　hello. It didn’t seem to bother the girls that there was a perfect 
　　stranger standing in their apartment. Finally, I saw a small coat 
　　closet tucked away behind the door, and I managed to get every 
　　twisted, slippery hanger on the rod.

　　“Not in the closet, Emily,” I heard Miranda call out, slowly, 
　　deliberately. “On the hooks that are provided for this exact 
　　occasion.”

　　“Oh, um, hi there.”Idiot! Shut up! She’s not looking for a response, 
　　just do what she says! But I couldn’t help it. It was just too weird 
　　that no one had said hello or wondered who I might be, or in any way 
　　acknowledged that someone had just let herself into their apartment 
　　and was prowling around. AndEmily? Was she kidding? Blind? Could she 
　　really not tell that I was not the girl who’d worked for her for 
　　over a year already? “I’m Andrea, Miranda. I’m your new assistant.”

　　Silence. All-pervasive, unbearable, never-ending, deafening, 
　　debilitating silence.

　　I knew I shouldn’t keep talking, knew that I was digging my own 
　　grave, but I just couldn’t help myself. “Um, well, sorry about the 
　　confusion. I’ll just put these on the hooks, like you said, and let 
　　myself out.”Stop narrating! She doesn’t give a shit what you’re 
　　doing. Just do it and get out . “OK, then, have a nice dinner. Nice 
　　meeting all of you.” I turned to leave and realized that not only 
　　was the mere act of talking ridiculous, but I was also saying stupid 
　　things.Nice to meet you? I hadn’t been introduced to a single one of 
　　them.

　　“Emily!” I heard just as my hand reached the doorknob. “Emily, let 
　　this not happen tomorrow night. We’re not interested in the 
　　interruption.” And the doorknob turned itself in my hand and I was 
　　finally in the hallway. The entire thing had taken less than a 
　　minute, but I felt like I’d just swum the entire length of an 
　　Olympic-size pool without coming up for air.

　　I slumped onto the bench and took long, controlled breaths. That 
　　bitch! The first time she called me Emily could’ve been a mistake, 
　　but the second was undoubtedly deliberate. What better way to 
　　belittle and marginalize someone than to insist on calling them the 
　　wrong name, after you’ve refused to so much as acknowledge their 
　　presence in your own Home? I knew I was the lowest-ranking life-form 
　　at the magazine already―as Emily hadn’t yet lost an opportunity to 
　　impress upon me―but was it really so necessary for Miranda to make 
　　sure I was aware of it, too?

　　It wouldn’t have been outside the realm of reality to sit there all 
　　night and shoot mental bullets at the PH A doors, but I heard a 
　　throat clearing and looked up to find the sad little elevator man 
　　watching the floor and patiently waiting for me to join him.

　　“Sorry,” I said as I shuffled aboard.

　　“No problem,” he near-whispered, intently studying the wood-paneled 
　　floor. “It’ll get easier.”

　　“What? I’m sorry, I didn’t hear what you―”

　　“Nothing, nothing. Here you are, miss. Have a nice evening.” The 
　　door opened to the lobby, where Emily was loudly chattering on her 
　　Cell Phone. She clicked it closed when she saw me.

　　“How’d it go? No problem, right?”

　　I thought about telling her what had transpired, wished fervently 
　　that she could be a sympathetic coworker, that we could be a team, 
　　but I knew I’d just be setting myself up for another verbal 
　　lashing.So not interested right now.

　　“It was totally fine. No problems at all. They were eating dinner 
　　and I just left everything exactly where you said.”

　　“Good. Well, that’s what you’ll do every night. Then just take the 
　　car Home and you’re done. Anyway, have fun at Marshall’s party 
　　tonight. I’d definitely go, but I have a bikini wax appointment I 
　　just can’t cancel―do you believe they’re booked for the next two 
　　months? And it’s the middle of winter, too. It must be all the 
　　people who are going on winter vacations. Right? I just can’t 
　　understand why every woman in New York needs a bikini wax right now. 
　　It’s just so strange, but hey, what can you do?”

　　My head pounded to the tempo of her voice, and it seemed that no 
　　matter what I did or how I responded, I was sentenced to forever 
　　listen to her talk about bikini waxes. It may have been better to 
　　have her scream at me about interrupting Miranda’s dinner.

　　“Yeah, what can you do? Well, I’d better get going, I told James I’d 
　　meet him at nine and it’s already ten after. See you tomorrow?”

　　“Yep. Will do. Oh, just so you know, now that you’re pretty much 
　　trained, you’ll still get in at seven, but I don’t come in until 
　　eight. Miranda knows―it’s understood that the senior assistant comes 
　　in later since she works so much harder.” I almost lunged at her 
　　throat. “So just go through the morning routine like I taught you. 
　　Call me if you have to, but you should know the drill by now. ’Bye!” 
　　She hopped into the backseat of the second car that was waiting in 
　　front of the building.

　　“’Bye!” I trilled, a giant fake smile plastered on my face. The 
　　driver made a move to get out of the car and open the door for me, 
　　but I told him I was fine to let myself into the backseat. “The 
　　Plaza, please.”

　　James had been waiting for me on the stairs outside even though it 
　　couldn’t have been more than twenty degrees. He’d gone Home to 
　　change and looked very, very skinny in black suede pants and a white 
　　ribbed tank top, which showed off his expertly applied midwinter 
　　bottle tan. I still looked appropriately amateurish in my Gap 
　　miniskirt.

　　“Hey, Andy, how’d the Book dropping-off go?” We waited in line to 
　　check our coats and I had immediately spotted Brad Pitt.

　　“Ohmigod, you’re joking. Brad Pitt’s here?”

　　“Yeah, well, Marshall does Jennifer’s hair, natch. So she must be 
　　here also. Really, Andy, maybe next time you’ll believe me when I 
　　tell you to stick with me. Let’s get a drink.”

　　The Reese and Johnny spottings had come back to back, and by the 
　　time oneA .M. rolled around, I’d had four drinks and was happily 
　　gabbing away with a fashion assistant fromVogue . We were discussing 
　　bikini waxes. Passionately. And it didn’t even bother me.Christ, I 
　　thought, as I weaved through the crowd looking for James, flashing a 
　　giant kiss-ass smile in the general direction of Jennifer Aniston 
　　when I passed by―this isn’t a half-bad party. But I was tipsy, I had 
　　to be at work again in less than six hours, and I hadn’t been Home 
　　in nearly twenty-four, so when I spotted James making out with one 
　　of the colorists from Marshall’s salon, I was just about to duck out 
　　when I felt a hand in the small of my back.

　　“Hey,” said the gorgeous guy I’d spotted earlier lurking in the 
　　corner. I waited for him to realize that he’d approached the wrong 
　　girl, that I must’ve looked the same as his girlfriend from behind, 
　　but he just smiled even wider. “Not so talkative, are you?”

　　“Oh, and saying ‘hey’ makes you articulate, I guess?”Andy! Shut your 
　　mouth! I berated silently.Some absolutely beautiful man approaches 
　　you out of the blue at a party full of celebrities and you tell him 
　　off right away? But he didn’t seem offended, and even though it 
　　didn’t seem possible, his smile increased in size to an all-out 
　　grin.

　　“Sorry,” I muttered while examining my nearly empty drink. “My 
　　name’s Andrea. There. I think that’s a much better way of 
　　beginning.” I stuck out my hand and wondered what he wanted.

　　“Actually, I liked your way just fine. Name’s Christian. A pleasure 
　　to meet you, Andy.” He pushed a brown curl out of his left eye and 
　　took a swig from a bottle of Budweiser. He looked vaguely familiar, 
　　I decided, but I couldn’t place him.

　　“Bud, huh?” I asked, pointing to his hand. “I didn’t think they 
　　served something so lowbrow at a party like this.”

　　He laughed, a deep, hearty laugh instead of the chuckle I’d 
　　expected. “You sure do say what you think, don’t you?” I must’ve 
　　looked mortified, because he smiled again and said, “No, no, that’s 
　　a good thing. And a rare thing, especially in this industry. I 
　　couldn’t bring myself to drink champagne from a straw out of a 
　　minibottle, you know? Something fairly emasculating about that. So 
　　the bartender dug one of these out of the kitchen somewhere.” 
　　Another curl push, but it fell back in his eye the moment he took 
　　his hand away. He pulled a pack of cigarettes from the pocket of his 
　　black sport coat and offered it to me. I took one and proceeded to 
　　drop it immediately, seizing the opportunity to examine him while I 
　　reached down to retrieve it.

　　It landed a few inches from his shiny, square-toed loafers that 
　　sported the irrefutable Gucci tassel, and on the way up I noticed 
　　that his Diesel jeans were the perfect parts faded, long, and wide 
　　enough at the bottom that they dragged a little behind the shiny 
　　loafers, the ends frayed from repeated interaction with the soles. A 
　　black belt, probably Gucci but thankfully not recognizable, kept the 
　　jeans riding in the perfect low spot below his waist, where he had 
　　tucked in a plain white cotton T-shirt―one that even though it 
　　easily could have been a Hanes was definitely an Armani or a Hugo 
　　Boss and was put in place only to offset his beautiful complexion. 
　　His black blazer looked just as expensive and well cut, perhaps even 
　　custom-made to fit his average-size but inexplicably sexy frame, and 
　　it was his green eyes that commanded the most attention. Seafoam, I 
　　thought, remembering the old J.Crew colors we’d loved so much in 
　　high school, or perhaps just a straightforward teal. The height, the 
　　build, the whole package looked vaguely like Alex, just with a whole 
　　lot more Euro style and a whole lot less Abercrombie. Slightly 
　　cooler, slightly better looking. Definitely older, right around 
　　thirty. And probably much too slick.

　　He immediately produced a flame and leaned in close to make sure my 
　　cigarette had caught. “So what brings you to a party like this, 
　　Andrea? Are you one of the lucky few who can call Marshall Madden 
　　her own?”

　　“No, I’m afraid not. At least not yet, although he wasn’t all that 
　　subtle in telling me that I probably should be.” I laughed, noticing 
　　for a brief moment that I wasdesperate to impress this stranger. “I 
　　work atRunway . One of the beauty guys dragged me here.”

　　“Ah,Runway magazine, huh? Cool place to work, if you’re into S&M and 
　　that sort of thing. How do you like it?”

　　I wasn’t sure if he meant S&M or the job itself, but I considered 
　　the possibility that he got it, that he was enough of an insider to 
　　know that it wasn’t exactly how it appeared to those on the outside. 
　　Perhaps I should charm him with the nightmare involved in dropping 
　　off the Book earlier that night? No, no, I had no idea who this guy 
　　was . . . for all I knew he also worked atRunway in some far-flung 
　　department I hadn’t even seen yet, or maybe for another Elias-Clark 
　　magazine. Or maybe, just maybe, he was one of those sneakyPage Six 
　　reporters that Emily had so carefully warned me against. “They just 
　　appear,” she’d said ominously. “They just appear and try to trick 
　　you into saying something juicy about Miranda orRunway . Just be 
　　aware.” Between that and the tracking ID cards, I was quite sure 
　　thatRunway ’s surveillance put the mob to shame. TheRunway Paranoid 
　　Turnaround was back.

　　“Yeah,” I said, trying to sound casual and noncommittal. “It’s a 
　　strange place. I’m not so into fashion―I’d actually rather be 
　　writing, but I guess it’s not a bad start. What do you do?”

　　“I’m a writer.”

　　“Oh, you are? That must be nice.” I hoped I didn’t sound quite as 
　　condescending as I felt, but it got to be really annoying when 
　　anyone and everyone in New York anointed himself or herself a writer 
　　or actor or poet or artist.I used to write for the paper in college, 
　　I thought to myself,and hell, I even had an essay published in a 
　　monthly magazine once in high school. Did that make me a writer? 
　　“What do you write?”

　　“Mostly literary fiction so far, but I’m actually working on my 
　　first historical novel.” He took another swig and swatted yet again 
　　at that pesky but adorable curl.

　　“First historical” implied that there other were nonhistorical 
　　novels. Interesting. “What’s it about?”

　　He thought for a moment and then said, “It’s a story told from the 
　　perspective of a young woman, about what it was like to live in this 
　　country during World War Two. I’m still finishing my research, 
　　transcribing interviews and things like that, but the little writing 
　　I’ve done so far has come along. I think . . .”

　　He continued talking, but I’d already tuned him out. Holy shit. I 
　　recognized the book description immediately from aNew Yorker article 
　　I’d just read. It seemed the entire book world was eagerly 
　　anticipating his next contribution and couldn’t shut up about the 
　　realism with which he depicts his female heroine. I was standing at 
　　a party, casually chatting with Christian Collinsworth, the boy 
　　genius who’d first been published at the ripe old age of twenty from 
　　a Yale library cubicle. The critics had gone crazy over his first 
　　book, hailing it as one of the most significant literary 
　　achievements of the twentieth century, and he’d followed it up with 
　　two more since then, each spending more time on the bestseller list 
　　than the one before it.The New Yorker piece had included an 
　　interview in which the author had called Christian “not only a force 
　　for years to come” in the book industry, but one with “a hell of a 
　　look, a killer style, and enough natural charm that would ensure―in 
　　the unlikely event that his literary success did not―a lifetime of 
　　success with the ladies.”

　　“Wow, that’s really great,” I said, all of a sudden feeling too 
　　tired to be witty or funny or cute. This guy was some big-time 
　　author―what the hell did he want with me, anyway? Probably just 
　　killing time before his girlfriend finished up her $10,000 per day 
　　modeling assignment and made her way over.And what does it matter 
　　either way, Andrea? I asked myself harshly.In case you conveniently 
　　forgot, you do happen to have an incredibly kind and supportive and 
　　adorable boyfriend. Enough of this already! I hastily made up a 
　　story about needing to get Home right away, and Christian looked 
　　amused.

　　“You’re scared of me,” he stated factually, flashing me a teasing 
　　smile.

　　“Scared of you? Why on earth wouldI be scared ofyou ? Unless there’s 
　　some reason I should be . . .” I couldn’t help but flirt back; he 
　　made it so easy.

　　He reached for my elbow and deftly turned me around. “Come on, I’ll 
　　put you in a cab.” And before I could say no, that I was perfectly 
　　fine to find my own way home, that it was nice to meet him but he’d 
　　better think again if he thought he was coming Home with me, I was 
　　standing on the red-carpeted steps of the Plaza with him.

　　“Need a cab, folks?” the doorman asked us as we walked outside.

　　“Yes, please, one for the lady,” Christian answered.

　　“No, I have a car, um, right over there,” I said, pointing to the 
　　strip of 58th Street in front of the Paris Theatre where all the 
　　Town Cars had lined up.

　　I wasn’t looking at him, but I could feel Christian smiling again. 
　　One ofthose smiles. He walked me over to the car and opened the 
　　door, swinging his arm gallantly toward the backseat.

　　“Thank you,” I said formally, not a little awkwardly, while 
　　extending my hand. “It was really nice to meet you, Christian.”

　　“And you, Andrea.” He took the hand I’d intended him to shake and 
　　instead pressed it to his lips, leaving it there just a fraction of 
　　a second longer than he should have. “I do hope we see each other 
　　again soon.” And by then I’d somehow made it into the backseat 
　　without tripping or otherwise humiliating myself and was 
　　concentrating on not blushing even though I could already feel that 
　　it was too late. He slammed the door and watched as the car pulled 
　　away.

　　It didn’t seem strange this time that even though I hadn’t so much 
　　as seen the interior of a Town Car two months earlier, I had 
　　personally had one chauffeuring me around for the past six hours, 
　　and that even though I’d never really met anyone even remotely 
　　famous before, I’d just rubbed elbows with Hollywood celebrities and 
　　had my hand nuzzled―yes, that was it, he’d nuzzled it―by one of the 
　　undisputed most eligible bachelors in New York City.No, none of that 
　　really matters, I reminded myself over and over again.It’s all a 
　　part of that world, and that world is no place you want to be. It 
　　might look like fun from here, I thought,but you’d be in way over 
　　your head. But I stared at my hand anyway, trying to remember every 
　　last detail about the way he’d kissed it, and then thrust the 
　　offending hand into my bag and pulled out my phone. As I dialed 
　　Alex’s number, I wondered what exactly, if anything, I would tell 
　　him.


　　9

　　It took me twelve weeks before I gorged myself on the seemingly 
　　limitless supply of designer clothes thatRunway was just begging to 
　　provide for me. Twelve impossibly long weeks of fourteen-hour work 
　　days and never more than five hours of sleep at a time. Twelve 
　　miserable long weeks of being looked up and down from hair to shoes 
　　each and every day, and never receiving a single compliment or even 
　　merely the impression that I had passed. Twelve horrifically long 
　　weeks of feeling stupid, incompetent, and all-around moronic. And so 
　　I decided at the beginning of my fourth month (only nine more to 
　　go!) atRunway to be a new woman and start dressing the part.

　　Getting myself awake, dressed, and out the door prior to my 
　　twelve-week epiphany had sapped me completely―even I had to concede 
　　that it’d be easier to own a closetful of “appropriate” clothes. 
　　Until that point, putting on clothes had been the most stressful 
　　part of an already really lousy morning routine. The alarm went off 
　　so early that I couldn’t bear to tell anyone what time I actually 
　　woke up, as though the mere mention of the words inflicted physical 
　　pain. Getting to work at sevenA .M. was so difficult it bordered on 
　　funny. Sure, I’d been up and out a few times in my life by 
　　seven―perhaps sitting in an airport when I had to catch an early 
　　flight or having to finish studying for an exam that day. But mostly 
　　when I’d seen that hour of daylight from the outside it was because 
　　I hadn’t yet found my way to bed from the night before, and the time 
　　didn’t seem so bad when a full day of sleep stretched out ahead. 
　　This was different. This was constant, unrelenting, inhumane sleep 
　　deprivation, and no matter how many times I tried to go to bed 
　　before midnight, I never could. The past two weeks had been 
　　particularly rough since they were closing one of the spring issues, 
　　so I had to sit at work, waiting for the Book, until close to eleven 
　　some nights. By the time I would drop it off and get Home, it was 
　　already midnight, and I still had to eat something and crawl out of 
　　my clothes before passing out.

　　Blaring static―the only thing I couldn’t ignore―began at exactly 
　　5:30A .M. I would force a bare foot out from under the comforter and 
　　stretch my leg in the general direction of the alarm clock (which 
　　itself was placed strategically at the foot of my bed to force some 
　　movement), kicking aimlessly until I had made contact and the 
　　shrieking ceased. This continued, steadily and predictably, every 
　　seven minutes until 6:04A .M., at which point I would inevitably 
　　panic and spring from bed to shower.

　　A tangle with my closet came next, usually between 6:31 and 6:37A 
　　.M. Lily, herself not exactly fashion-conscious in her graduate 
　　student uniform of jeans, ratty L.L.Bean sweaters, and hemp 
　　necklaces, said every time I saw her, “I still don’t understand what 
　　you wear to work. It’sRunway magazine, for god’s sake. Your clothes 
　　are as cute as the next girl’s, Andy, but nothing you own isRunway 
　　material.”

　　I didn’t tell her that for the first few months I had risen extra 
　　early with an intense determination to coaxRunway looks from my very 
　　Banana RepublicCheavy wardrobe. I’d stood with my microwaved coffee 
　　for nearly a half hour each morning, agonizing over boots and belts, 
　　wool, and microfiber. I’d change stockings five times until I 
　　finally had the right color, only to berate myself that stockings of 
　　any style or color wereso not OK . The heels on my shoes were always 
　　too short, too stacked, too thick. I didn’t own a single thing in 
　　cashmere. I had not yet heard of thongs (!) and therefore obsessed 
　　maniacally over how to banish panty lines, themselves the focus of 
　　many a Coffee-break critique. No matter how many times I tried them 
　　on, I couldn’t bring myself to wear a tube top to work.

　　And so after three months, I surrendered. I just got too tired. 
　　Emotionally, physically, mentally, the daily wardrobe ordeal had 
　　sapped me of all energy. Until, that is, I relented on the 
　　three-month anniversary of my first day. It was a day like any other 
　　as I stood with my yellow “I ? Providence” mug in one hand, the 
　　other hand rifling through my Abercrombie favorites.Why fight it? I 
　　asked myself. Simply wearing their clothes wouldn’t necessarily mean 
　　I was a total sellout, would it? And besides, the comments on my 
　　current wardrobe were becoming more frequent and vicious, and I had 
　　begun to wonder if my job was at risk. I looked in the full-length 
　　mirror and had to laugh: the girl in the Maidenform bra (ich!) and 
　　cotton Jockey bikinis (double ich!) was trying to look the part 
　　ofRunway ? Hah. Not with this shit. I was working atRunway magazine 
　　for chrissake―simply putting on anything that wasn’t torn, frayed, 
　　stained, or outgrown really wasn’t going to cut it anymore. I pushed 
　　aside my generic button-downs and ferreted out the tweedy Prada 
　　skirt, black Prada turtleneck, and midcalf length Prada boots that 
　　Jeffy had handed me one night while I waited for the Book.

　　“What’s this?” I’d asked, unzipping the garment bag.

　　“This, Andy, is what you should be wearing if you don’t want to get 
　　fired.” He smiled, but he wouldn’t look me in the eye.

　　“I’m sorry?”

　　“Look, I just think you should know that your, uh, your look isn’t 
　　really going over well with everyone around here. Now, I know this 
　　stuff gets expensive, but there’s ways around that. I’ve got so much 
　　stuff in the Closet that no one will notice if you need to, uh, 
　　borrow some of it sometimes.” He made quote marks with his fingers 
　　around the word “borrow.” “And, of course, you should be calling all 
　　the PR people and getting your discount card for their designers. I 
　　only get thirty percent off, but since you work for Miranda, I’ll be 
　　surprised if they charge you for anything. There’s no reason for 
　　this, uh,Gap thing you’ve got going on to continue.”

　　I didn’t explain that wearing Nine West instead of Manolos or jeans 
　　they sold in Macy’s junior department but not anywhere on Barney’s 
　　eighth floor of couture denim heaven had been my own attempt to show 
　　everyone that I wasn’t seduced by all thingsRunway . Instead, I just 
　　nodded, noticing that he looked supremely uncomfortable having to 
　　tell me that I was humiliating myself every day. I wondered who had 
　　put him up to it. Emily? Or Miranda herself? Didn’t really matter 
　　either way. Hell, I’d already survived three full months―if wearing 
　　a Prada turtleneck instead of one from Urban Outfitters was going to 
　　help me survive the next nine, then so be it. I decided I’d start 
　　putting together a new and improved wardrobe immediately.

　　I finally made it outside by 6:50A .M., actually feeling pretty damn 
　　good about the way I looked. The guy in the breakfast cart closest 
　　to my apartment even whistled, and a woman stopped me before I’d 
　　taken ten steps and told me she had been eyeing those boots for 
　　three months now.I could get used to this, I thought. Everyone’s got 
　　to put something on every day, and this sure felt a hell of a lot 
　　better than any of my stuff. As was now habit, I walked to the 
　　corner of Third Avenue and promptly hailed a cab and collapsed into 
　　the warm backseat, too tired to be thankful that I didn’t have to 
　　join the commoners on the subway, and croaked, “Six-forty Madison. 
　　Quickly, please.” The cabbie looked at me through the rearview―with 
　　a touch of sympathy, I swear―and said, “Ah, yes. Elias-Clark 
　　building,” and we squealed left onto 97th Street and made another 
　　left onto Lex, flying through the lights until 59th Street, where we 
　　headed west to Madison. After exactly six minutes, since there was 
　　no traffic, we came to a screeching halt in front of the tall, thin, 
　　sleek monolith that set such a fine physical example for so many of 
　　its inhabitants. The fare came to $6.40 like it did every single 
　　morning, and I handed the cabbie a ten-dollar bill, like I did every 
　　single morning. “Keep the change,” I sang, feeling the same joy I 
　　did every day when I saw their shock and Happiness. “It’s onRunway 
　　.”

　　No problem there, that’s for sure. It took all of a week on the job 
　　to see that accounting wasn’t exactly a strong suit at Elias, not 
　　even a real priority. It was never a problem to write off ten-dollar 
　　cab rides each and every day. Another company might wonder what gave 
　　you the right to take a cab to work in the first place; Elias-Clark 
　　wondered why you had deigned to take a cab when there was a car 
　　service available. Something about gypping the company out of that 
　　extra ten bucks each day―even though I don’t imagine anyone was 
　　directly suffering from my overspending―made me feel a whole lot 
　　better. Some might have called it passive-aggressive rebellion. I 
　　called it getting even.

　　I bolted from the cab, still happy to make someone else’s day, and 
　　walked toward 640 Madison. Although it was named the Elias-Clark 
　　building, JS Bergman, one of the most prestigious banks in the city 
　　(obviously), rented half of it. We didn’t share anything with them, 
　　not even an elevator bank, but it didn’t stop their rich bankers and 
　　our fashion beauties from checking each other out in the lobby.

　　“Hey, Andy. What’s up? Long time, no see.” The voice behind me 
　　sounded sheepish and unwilling, and I wondered why whoever it was 
　　didn’t just leave me alone.

　　I’d been mentally preparing myself to start the morning routine with 
　　Eduardo when I’d heard my name, and I turned to see Benjamin, one of 
　　Lily’s many ex-boyfriends from college, slumped against the building 
　　just outside the entrance, not even seeming to notice that he was 
　　sitting on the sidewalk. He was only one of many of Lily’s guys, but 
　　he’d been the first one she’d really, genuinely liked. I hadn’t 
　　spoken to good old Benji (he loathed being called that) since Lily 
　　had walked in on him having sex with two girls from her a capella 
　　singing group. Walked right into his off-campus apartment and found 
　　him sprawled out in his living room with one soprano and a 
　　contralto, mousy girls who never did manage to look at Lily again. 
　　I’d tried to convince her it was just a college prank, but she 
　　didn’t buy it. Cried for days, and made me promise not to tell 
　　anyone what she’d discovered. I didn’t have to tell anyone, though, 
　　because he did―bragged to anyone who would listen about how he’d 
　　“nailed two singing geeks,” as he’d put it, while “a third one 
　　watched.” He’d made it sound as though Lily had been there the 
　　entire time, agreeably perched on the couch and watching her big, 
　　bad man go about being manly. Lily had sworn to never let herself 
　　really fall for another guy, and so far seemed to be keeping her 
　　promise. She slept with plenty of them, but she sure didn’t let them 
　　stick around long enough to actually run the risk of discovering 
　　something likable about them.

　　I looked at him again and tried to find the old Benji in this guy’s 
　　face. He had been athletic and cute. Just a normal guy. But Bergman 
　　had turned him into a shell of a human. He was wearing an oversize, 
　　wrinkled suit and looked as though he was hoping to suck crack 
　　cocaine out of his Marlboro. He seemed already overworked even 
　　though it was only seven o’clock, and this made me feel better. 
　　Because it was payback for being an asshole to Lily, and because I 
　　wasn’t the only one dragging myself to work at such an obscene hour. 
　　He was probably getting paid $150,000 a year to be so miserable, but 
　　whatever, at least I wasn’t alone.

　　Benji saluted me with his lit cigarette, glowing eerily in the still 
　　dark winter morning, and motioned for me to come over. I was nervous 
　　I’d be late, but Eduardo gave me his “Don’t worry, she’s not here 
　　yet―you’re fine” look and I walked over to Benji. He looked 
　　bleary-eyed and hopeless. He probably thoughthe had a tyrannical 
　　boss. Hah! If only he knew. I wanted to laugh out loud.

　　“Hey, I noticed you’re the only one here this early every day,” he 
　　muttered at me while I dug around in my bag for lipstick before 
　　hitting the elevators. “What’s the deal?”

　　He looked so tired, so beaten-down, that I felt a surge of sympathy 
　　and kindness. But then I felt my legs nearly give out from 
　　exhaustion, and I remembered the way Lily had looked when one of 
　　Benji’s dumb lacrosse buddies had asked if she’d been happy to watch 
　　or really actually wanted to join in, and I lost my cool.

　　“Well, my deal is that I work for a rather demanding woman, and I 
　　need to get here two and a half hours before the rest of the goddamn 
　　magazine so that I’m prepared for her,” I said, my tone dripping 
　　with anger and sarcasm.

　　“Whoa. Just asking. Sorry, though, it sounds pretty bad. Which one 
　　do you work for?”

　　“I work for Miranda Priestly,” I said, and prayed for a nonreaction. 
　　Something about having a seemingly well-educated, successful 
　　professional have no idea who Miranda was made me very, very happy. 
　　Delighted almost. And luckily, this one didn’t let me down. He 
　　shrugged and inhaled and looked at me expectantly.

　　“She’s the editor in chief ofRunway, ” I lowered my voice and began 
　　with glee, “and pretty much the biggest bitch I’ve ever met. I mean, 
　　I’ve honestly never met anyone like her. She’s really not even 
　　human.” I had a litany of complaints I would’ve liked to have dumped 
　　on Benji, but theRunway Paranoid Turnaround came on full-force. I 
　　became immediately nervous, almost paranoid, convinced that this 
　　unknowing, uncaring person was somehow one of Miranda’s lackeys, 
　　sent to spy on me from theObserver orPage Six. I knew it was 
　　ridiculous, completely absurd. After all, I had personally known 
　　Benji for years now and was quite sure he wasn’t working for Miranda 
　　in any capacity. Just not totally sure. After all, how could you be 
　　totally sure? And who knew who could be standing behind me at that 
　　very second, overhearing every one of my nasty words? Damage control 
　　was required immediately.

　　“Of course, she IS the most powerful woman in fashion and 
　　publishing, and you just can’t get to the top of two major 
　　industries in New York City handing out candy all day long. Um, it’s 
　　understandable that she’s a little tough to work for, you know? I 
　　would be, too. Yeah, so, um, I have to run now. Good seeing you 
　　again.” And I ducked away, as I often had the past few weeks when I 
　　found myself talking to someone other than Lily or Alex or my 
　　parents and I couldn’t help myself from bashing the witch.

　　“Hey, don’t feel too bad,” he called after me as I headed toward the 
　　elevator bank. “I’ve been here since last Thursday morning.” And 
　　with that, he dropped his smoldering butt and half-heartedly stamped 
　　it into the cement.

　　“Morning, Eduardo,” I said, looking at him with my best tired, 
　　pathetic eyes. “I fucking hate Mondays.”

　　“Hey, buddy, don’t worry. At least you beat her here this morning,” 
　　he said, smiling. He was referring, of course, to those miserable 
　　mornings when Miranda would show up at fiveA .M. and need to be 
　　escorted upstairs since she refused to carry an access card. She’d 
　　then pace the office, calling Emily and me over and over until one 
　　of us could manage to wake up, get ready, and get to work as if a 
　　national security emergency were unfolding.

　　I pushed against the turnstile, praying that this Monday would be 
　　the exception, that he’d let me pass without a performance. 
　　Negative.

　　“Yo, tell me what you want, what you really, really want,”he sang 
　　with his huge, toothy smile and Spanish accent. And all the pleasure 
　　of making the cabbie happy and finding out that I had arrived ahead 
　　of Miranda vanished. I was left, as I was every morning, wanting to 
　　reach across the security counter and tear the flesh from Eduardo’s 
　　face. But since I was such a good sport and he was one of my only 
　　friends in the place, I weakly acquiesced.“I’ll tell you what I 
　　want, what I really, really want, I wanna―I wanna―I wanna―I wanna―I 
　　really, really, really wanna zigga zig aaaaaahhhh,” I sang meekly in 
　　a pitiful tribute to the Spice Girls’ nineties hit. And once again, 
　　Eduardo grinned and buzzed me through.

　　“Hey, don’t forget: July sixteenth!” he called after me.

　　“I know, July sixteenth . . .” I called back, a reference to our 
　　shared birthdays. I don’t remember how or why he had discovered my 
　　birthdate, but he adored that we had the same one. And for some 
　　inexplicable reason, it became a part of our personal morning 
　　ritual. Every single goddamn day.

　　There were eight elevators on the Elias-Clark side, half for floors 
　　one to seventeen, half for seventeen and up. Only the first bank 
　　really mattered since most of the big names were on the first 
　　seventeen floors; they advertised their presence with illuminated 
　　panels over the elevator doors. There was a free, state-of-the-art 
　　gym on the second floor for employees, complete with a full Nautilus 
　　circuit and at least a hundred Stairmasters, treadmills, and 
　　elliptical machines. The locker rooms had saunas, hot tubs, steam 
　　rooms, and attendants in maids’ uniforms, and a salon offered 
　　emergency manicures, pedicures, and facials. There was even 
　　complimentary towel service, or so I’d heard―not only did I not have 
　　the time, the place was always too damn crowded between the hours of 
　　sixA .M. and tenP .M. to so much as walk around. Writers and editors 
　　and sales assistants called three days ahead of time to book 
　　themselves into the yoga or kick-boxing classes, and even then they 
　　lost their place if they didn’t get there fifteen minutes in 
　　advance. Like nearly everything at Elias-Clark designed to make 
　　employees’ lives better, it just stressed me out.

　　I’d heard a rumor that there was a daycare center in the basement, 
　　but I didn’t know anyone who actually had children, so I still 
　　wasn’t entirely positive. The real action began on the third floor 
　　with the dining room, where so far Miranda had refused to eat among 
　　the peons unless she was lunching with Irv Ravitz, Elias’s CEO, who 
　　liked to eat there in a show of unity with his employees.

　　Up, up, up we went, past all the other famous titles. Most of them 
　　had to share floors, with one flanking each side of the 
　　receptionist’s desk, facing off behind separate glass doors. I 
　　hopped off at the seventeenth floor, checking my butt in the 
　　reflection of the door’s glass. In a stroke of empathy and genius, 
　　the architect had kindly left mirrors out of the elevators in 640 
　　Madison. As usual, I’d forgotten my electronic ID card―the very same 
　　one that tracked all our movements, purchases, and absences in the 
　　building―and had to break onto the floor. Sophy didn’t come in until 
　　nine, so I had to bend down under her desk, find the button that 
　　would release the glass doors, and sprint from the middle of the 
　　reception area to the doors and yank them open before they snapped 
　　locked again. Sometimes I’d have to do this three or four times 
　　until I finally caught it, but today I made it on my second attempt.

　　The floor was always dark when I arrived, and I took the same route 
　　to my desk every morning. To my left when I walked in was the 
　　advertising department, the girls who most loved adorning themselves 
　　in Chloé T-shirts and spike-heeled boots while handing out Business 
　　cards that screamed “Runway.” They were removed, wholly and 
　　entirely, from anything and everything that took place on the 
　　editorial side of the floor: it was editorial that picked the 
　　clothes for the fashion spreads, wooed the good writers, matched the 
　　accessories to the outfits, interviewed the models, edited the copy, 
　　designed the layouts, and hired the photographers. Editorial 
　　traveled to hot spots around the world for shoots, got free gifts 
　　and discounts from all the designers, hunted for trends, and went to 
　　parties at Pastis and Float because they “had to check out what 
　　people were wearing.”

　　Ad sales was left to try and sell ad space. Sometimes they threw 
　　promotional parties, but they were celebrity-free and therefore 
　　boring to New York’s hipster scene (or so Emily had sneeringly told 
　　me). My phone would ring off the hook on a day during aRunway ad 
　　sales party with people I didn’t know really well looking for an 
　　invite. “Um, like, I hearRunway ’s having a party tonight. Why am I 
　　not invited?” I always found out from someone on the outside that 
　　there was a party that night: editorial was never invited because 
　　they wouldn’t go anyway. As if it wasn’t enough for theRunway girls 
　　to mock, terrorize, and ostracize any and every person who wasn’t 
　　one of them, they had to create internal class lines as well.

　　The ad sales department gave way to a long, narrow hallway. It 
　　seemed to stretch forever before arriving at a tiny kitchen on the 
　　left side. Here were an assortment of Coffees and teas, a fridge for 
　　stored lunches―all superfluous, since Starbucks had a monopoly on 
　　employees’ daily caffeine fixes and all meals were carefully 
　　selected in the dining room or ordered in from any one of a thousand 
　　midtown takeout places. But it was a nice touch, almost cute; it 
　　said,“Hey, look at us, we have Lipton tea packets and Sweet’N Lows 
　　and even a microwave in case you want to warm up some of last 
　　night’s dinner! We’re just like everyone else!”

　　I finally made it to Miranda’s enclave at 7:05, so tired I could 
　　barely move. But as with everything, there was yet another routine 
　　that I never thought to question or alter, so I began in earnest. I 
　　unlocked her office and turned on all the lights. It was still dark 
　　outside, and I loved the drama of standing in the dark in the power 
　　monger’s office, staring out at a flashing and restless New York 
　　City and picturing myself in one of those movies (take your pick―any 
　　that have lovers embracing on the expansive terrace of his $6 
　　million apartment with views of the river), feeling on top of the 
　　world. And then the lights would blaze forth, and my fantasy was 
　　over. The anything-is-possible feel of New York at dawn vanished, 
　　and the identical, grinning faces of Caroline and Cassidy were all I 
　　could see.

　　Next I unlocked the closet in our outer office area, the place where 
　　I hung her coat (and mine if she wasn’t wearing a fur that 
　　day―Miranda didn’t like Emily’s or my pedestrian wools hanging next 
　　to her minks) and where we kept a number of supplies: castoff coats 
　　and clothes that were worth tens of thousands of dollars, some new 
　　dry cleaning that had been delivered to the office but not yet 
　　brought up to Miranda’s apartment, at least two hundred of the 
　　infamous white Hermès scarves. I’d heard that Hermès had decided to 
　　discontinue her particular style last year, a simple and elegant 
　　white silk square. Someone at the company felt they owed Miranda an 
　　explanation and actually called to apologize to her. Unsurprisingly, 
　　she’d coldly told them how disappointed she was and promptly 
　　purchased their entire remaining stock. About five hundred of the 
　　scarves had been delivered to the office a couple years before I’d 
　　gotten there, and we were now down to less than half. Miranda left 
　　them everywhere: restaurants, movies, fashion shows, weekly 
　　meetings, taxis. She left them on airplanes, at her daughters’ 
　　school, on the tennis court. Of course, she always had one stylishly 
　　incorporated into her outfit―I’d yet to see her outside her own Home 
　　without one. But that didn’t explain where they all went. Perhaps 
　　she thought they were handkerchiefs? Or maybe she liked jotting 
　　notes on silk instead of paper? Whatever it was, she seemed to truly 
　　believe they were disposable, and none of us knew how to tell her 
　　otherwise. Elias-Clark had paid a couple hundred dollars for each 
　　one, but no matter: we handed them out to her as though they were 
　　Kleenex. At the rate she was going, in under two years, Miranda was 
　　due to run out.

　　I’d arranged the stiff orange boxes on the ready-to-distribute shelf 
　　of the closet, where they never remained for very long. Every third 
　　or fourth day, she’d prepare to leave for lunch and sigh, 
　　“Ahn-dre-ah, hand me a scarf.” I comforted myself with the thought 
　　that I’d be long gone by the time she ran out of them completely. 
　　Whoever was unlucky enough to be around would have to tell her that 
　　there were no more white Hermès scarves, and that none could be 
　　made, shipped, created, formed, mailed, ordered, or mandated. The 
　　mere thought was terrifying.

　　Just as I got the closet and office opened, Uri called.

　　“Andrea? Hello, hello. It is Uri. Could you come downstairs please? 
　　I am on Fifty-eighth Street, closer to Park Avenue, right in front 
　　of the New York sports Club. I have things for you.”

　　This call was a good although imperfect way of telling me that 
　　Miranda would be arriving somewhat soon. Maybe. Most mornings she 
　　sent Uri ahead to the office with her things, an assortment of dirty 
　　clothes that needed dry cleaning, any copy she’d taken Home to read, 
　　magazines, shoes or bags that needed to be fixed, and the Book. This 
　　way, she could have me meet the car and carry up all of these rather 
　　mundane things ahead of schedule and deal with them before she 
　　stepped into the office. She tended to follow her stuff by about a 
　　half hour, since Uri would drop off her things and then go pick her 
　　up from wherever she might be hiding that morning.

　　She herself could be anywhere, since, according to Emily, she never 
　　slept. I didn’t believe it until I started getting to the office 
　　ahead of Emily and would be the first to listen to the voice mail. 
　　Every night, without exception, Miranda would leave eight to ten 
　　ambiguous messages for us between the hours of one and six in the 
　　morning. Things like, “Cassidy wants one of those nylon bags all the 
　　little girls are carrying. Order her one in the medium size and a 
　　color she’d like,” and “I’ll be needing the address and phone number 
　　of that antique store in the seventies, the one where I saw the 
　　vintage dresser.” As though we knew which nylon bags were all the 
　　rage among ten-year-olds or at which one of four hundred antique 
　　stores in the seventies―east or west, by the way?―she happened to 
　　spot something she liked at some point in the past fifteen years. 
　　But each morning I faithfully listened to and transcribed those 
　　messages, hitting “replay” over and over and over again, trying to 
　　make sense of the accent and interpret the clues in order to avoid 
　　asking Miranda directly for more information.

　　Once, I made the mistake of suggesting that we actually ask Miranda 
　　to provide a few more details, only to be met with one of Emily’s 
　　withering looks. Questioning Miranda was apparently off-limits. 
　　Better to muddle through and wait to be told how off the mark our 
　　results were. To locate the vintage dresser that had caught 
　　Miranda’s eye, I had spent two and a half days in a limo, cruising 
　　around Manhattan, through the seventies on both sides of the park. I 
　　ruled out York Avenue (too residential) and proceeded up First, down 
　　Second, up Third, down Lex. I skipped Park (again, too residential) 
　　but continued up Madison, and then repeated a similar process on the 
　　West Side. Pen poised, eyes peeled, phone book open in my lap, ready 
　　to jump out at the first sight of a store that sold antiques. I 
　　graced every single antique store―and not a few regular furniture 
　　stores―with a personal visit. By store number four, I had it down to 
　　an art form.

　　“Hi, do you sell any vintage dressers?” I’d practically scream the 
　　second they buzzed me inside. By the sixth store I wasn’t even 
　　bothering to move in from the doorway. Some snotty salesperson 
　　inevitably looked me up and down―I couldn’t escape it!―sizing me up 
　　to decide if I was someone to be bothered with. Most would notice 
　　the waiting Town Car at this point and grudgingly provide me with a 
　　yes or no answer, although some wanted detailed descriptions of the 
　　dresser I was looking for.

　　If they admitted to selling something that fit my two-word 
　　requirement, I would immediately follow up with a curt “Has Miranda 
　　Priestly been here recently?” If they hadn’t thought I was crazy at 
　　this point, they now looked ready to call security. A few had never 
　　heard her name, which was fantastic both because it was rejuvenating 
　　to see firsthand that there were still normally functioning human 
　　beings whose lives weren’t dominated by her, and also because I 
　　could promptly leave without further discussion. The pathetic 
　　majority who recognized the name became instantly curious. Some 
　　wondered which gossip column I wrote for. But regardless of whatever 
　　story I made up, no one had seen her in their shop (with the 
　　exception of three stores who hadn’t “seen Ms. Priestly in months, 
　　and oh, how we miss her! Please do tell her that 
　　Franck/Charlotte/Sarabeth sends his/her love!”).

　　When I hadn’t located the shop by noon of the third day, Emily 
　　finally gave me the green light to come to the office and ask 
　　Miranda for clarification. I started sweating when the car pulled in 
　　front of the building. I threatened to climb over the turnstile if 
　　Eduardo didn’t let me pass without a performance. By the time I 
　　reached our floor, the sweat had soaked through my shirt. Hands 
　　started shaking the moment I entered the office suite, and the 
　　perfectly prepared speech (Hello, Miranda. I’m fine, thanks so much 
　　for asking. How are you? Listen, I just wanted to let you know that 
　　I’ve been trying very hard to locate the antique store you 
　　described, but I haven’t had much luck. Perhaps you could tell me 
　　whether it’s on the east or west side of Manhattan? Or maybe you 
　　even recall the name?) simply vanished into the fickle regions of my 
　　very nervous brain. Against all protocol, I didn’t post my question 
　　on the Bulletin; I requested permission to approach her at her desk 
　　and―probably because she was so shocked I’d had the nerve to speak 
　　without being spoken to―she granted it. To make a long story short, 
　　Miranda sighed and patronized and condescended and insulted in every 
　　delightful way of hers but finally opened her black leather Hermès 
　　planner (tied shut inconveniently but chicly with a white Hermès 
　　scarf) and produced . . . the Business card for the store.

　　“I left this information on the recording for you, Ahn-dre-ah. I 
　　suppose it would have been too much trouble to write it down?” And 
　　even though the yearning to make decorative paper-cut designs all 
　　over her face with the aforementioned Business card filled my entire 
　　being, I simply nodded and agreed. It wasn’t until I looked down at 
　　the card that I noticed the address: 244 East 68th Street. 
　　Naturally. East or west or Second Avenue or Amsterdam wouldn’t have 
　　made a damn bit of difference, because the store I’d just dedicated 
　　the past thirty-three working hours to locating wasn’t even in the 
　　seventies.

　　I thought of this as I wrote down the last of Miranda’s late-night 
　　requests before racing downstairs to meet Uri at our designated 
　　area. Every morning he described where he parked in great detail so 
　　I could theoretically meet him at the car. But every morning, no 
　　matter how fast I made it downstairs, he’d bring everything inside 
　　himself so I wouldn’t have to race up and down the streets searching 
　　for him. I was delighted to see that today was no exception: he was 
　　leaning against a lobby turnstile, holding bags and clothes and 
　　books in his arms like a benevolent, generous grandfather.

　　“Don’t you run to me, you hear?” he said in his thick Russian 
　　accent. “All day long, you run, run, run. She makes you work very, 
　　very hard. This is why I bring the tings to you,” he said, helping 
　　me get a grip on the overflowing bags and boxes. “You be a good 
　　girl, you hear, and have a nice day.”

　　I shot him a grateful look, glared at Eduardo semijokingly―my way of 
　　saying, “I will fucking kill you if you eventhink of asking me to 
　　strike a pose right now”―and softened a bit when he buzzed me 
　　through the turnstiles, comment-free. I miraculously remembered to 
　　stop by the lobby newsstand, where Ahmed piled all of Miranda’s 
　　requested morning papers into my arms. Although the mailroom 
　　delivered each to Miranda’s desk by nine each day, I was still to 
　　purchase a full second set every morning to help minimize the risk 
　　that she would spend a single second in her office without her 
　　papers. Same with the weekly magazines. No one seemed to mind that 
　　we charged nine newspapers a day and seven magazines a week for 
　　someone who read only the gossip and fashion pages.

　　I dumped all her stuff on the floor under my desk. It was time for 
　　the first round of ordering. I dialed the number I’d memorized long 
　　ago for Mangia, a gourmet takeout place in midtown, and, as usual, 
　　Jorge answered.

　　“Hi, pumpkin, it’s me,” I’d say, propping the phone against my 
　　shoulder so I could start logging into Hotmail. “Let’s get this day 
　　started.” Jorge and I were friends. Talking three, four, five times 
　　a morning had a funny way of bonding two people rather quickly.

　　“Hey, baby, I’ll send one of the boys over right away. Is she there 
　　yet?” he asked, understanding that “she” was my lunatic boss and 
　　that she worked forRunway, but not quite understanding who exactly 
　　would be consuming the breakfast I had just ordered. Jorge was one 
　　of my morning men, as I liked to call them. Eduardo, Uri, Jorge, and 
　　Ahmed gave a decent as possible start to my day. They were 
　　deliciously unaffiliated withRunway, even though their separate 
　　existences in my life were solely meant to make its editor’s life 
　　more perfect. Not a single one of them truly understood Miranda’s 
　　power and prestige.

　　Breakfast number one would be on its way to 640 Madison in seconds, 
　　and the chances were good I’d have to throw it out. Miranda ate four 
　　slices of greasy, fatty bacon, two sausage links, and a soft cheese 
　　Danish every morning, and washed it down with a tall latte from 
　　Starbucks (two raw sugars, remember!). As far as I could tell, the 
　　office was divided on whether she was permanently on the Atkins diet 
　　or just lucky enough to have a superhuman metabolism, the result of 
　　some pretty fantastic genes. Either way, she thought nothing of 
　　devouring the fattiest, most sickeningly unhealthy foods―even though 
　　the rest of us weren’t exactly afforded the same luxury. Since 
　　nothing stayed hot for more than ten minutes after it arrived, I’d 
　　keep reordering and tossing until she showed up. I could get away 
　　with microwaving each meal one time, but that bought me only an 
　　extra five minutes, and she could usually tell. (“Ahn-dre-ah, this 
　　is vile. Get me a fresh breakfast at once.”) I would order and 
　　reorder every twenty minutes or so until she called from her Cell 
　　Phone and told me to order her breakfast (“Ahn-dre-ah, I’ll be at 
　　the office shortly. Order my breakfast”). Of course, this was 
　　usually only a two- or three-minute warning, so the preordering was 
　　necessary both because of the short warning and in the rather common 
　　event that she didn’t bother to call at all. If I’d done my job, by 
　　the time her actual call for breakfast had come, I’d already have 
　　two or three on the way.

　　The phone rang. It had to be her, too early to be anyone else.

　　“Miranda Priestly’s office,” I chirped, bracing myself for the 
　　iciness.

　　“Emily, I’ll be there in ten minutes and I’d like my breakfast to be 
　　ready.”

　　She had taken to calling both Emily and me “Emily,” suggesting, 
　　quite rightly, that we were indistinguishable from each other and 
　　completely interchangeable. Somewhere in the back of my mind I was 
　　offended, but I’d grown accustomed to it at this point. And besides, 
　　I was too tired to really care about something as incidental as my 
　　name.

　　“Yes, Miranda, right away.” But she had already hung up. The real 
　　Emily walked into the office.

　　“Hey, is she here?” she whispered, looking furtively toward 
　　Miranda’s office as she always did, without a hello or a good 
　　morning, just like her mentor.

　　“Nope, but she just called and she’ll be here in ten. I’ll be back.”

　　I quickly transferred my cell phone and cigarettes to my coat pocket 
　　and ran. I had only a few minutes to get downstairs, cross Madison, 
　　and jump the line at Starbucks―and suck down my first precious 
　　cigarette of the day while in transit. Stamping out the last embers, 
　　I stumbled into the Starbucks at 57th and Lex and surveyed the line. 
　　If it was fewer than eight or so people, I preferred to wait like a 
　　normal person. Like most days, however, the line today was twenty or 
　　more poor professional souls, wearily waiting in line for their 
　　expensive caffeine fix, and I had to jump in front of them. It was 
　　not something I relished, but Miranda didn’t seem to understand that 
　　the latte I presented to her each morning could not onlynot be 
　　delivered but could easily take a half hour at prime time to 
　　purchase. A couple weeks of shrill, angry phone calls on my Cell 
　　Phone (“Ahn-dre-ah, I simply do not understand. I called you a full 
　　twenty-five minutes ago to tell you I’d be in, and my breakfast is 
　　not ready. This is unacceptable.”), and I had spoken to the 
　　franchise manager.

　　“Um, hi. Thanks for taking a minute to talk with me,” I said to the 
　　petite black woman who was in charge. “I know this sounds absolutely 
　　crazy, but I was wondering if we could work something out in terms 
　　of me having to wait in line.” I went on to explain, as best I 
　　could, that I work for a rather important, unreasonable person who 
　　doesn’t like to wait for her morning Coffee, and was there any way I 
　　could walk ahead of the line, subtly, of course, and have someone 
　　prepare my order immediately? By some stroke of dumb luck, Marion, 
　　the manager, was going to FIT at night for a degree in fashion 
　　merchandising.

　　“Ohmigod, are you kidding? You work for Miranda Priestly? And she 
　　drinks our lattes? A tall? Every morning? Unbelievable. Oh, yes, 
　　yes, of course! I’ll tell everyone to help you right away. Don’t 
　　worry about a thing. She is, like, the most powerful person in 
　　fashion,” Marion gushed as I forced myself to nod enthusiastically.

　　And so it came that I could, at will, bypass a long line of tired, 
　　aggressive, self-righteous New Yorkers and order before those who 
　　had been waiting for many, many minutes. It didn’t make me feel good 
　　or important or even cool, and I always dreaded the days I had to do 
　　it. When the lines were hellishly long like the one today―snaking 
　　around the entire counter and pushing its way outside―I felt even 
　　worse and knew I’d be walking out with a full load. My head was 
　　pounding at this point, and my eyes already felt heavy and dry. I 
　　tried to forget that this was my life, the reason I’d spent four 
　　long years memorizing poems and examining prose, the result of good 
　　grades and lots of kissing up. Instead, I ordered Miranda’s tall 
　　latte from one of the new baristas and added a few drinks of my own. 
　　A grande Amaretto Cappuccino, a Mocha Frappuccino, and a Caramel 
　　Macchiato landed in my four-cup carrier, along with a half-dozen 
　　muffins and croissants. The grand total came to $28.83, and I made 
　　sure to tuck my receipt into the already bulging, specially 
　　designated receipt section of my wallet, all of which would be 
　　reimbursed by the always reliable Elias-Clark.

　　I had to hurry now, as it was already twelve minutes since Miranda 
　　had called and I knew she’d probably be sitting there, seething, 
　　wondering exactly where I disappeared to every morning―the Starbucks 
　　logo on the side of the cup didn’t ever clue her in. But before I 
　　could pick up all the stuff from the counter, my phone rang. And as 
　　usual, my heart lurched. I knew it was her, absolutely, positively 
　　knew it, but it scared me nonetheless. The caller ID confirmed my 
　　suspicion, and I was surprised to hear that it was Emily, calling 
　　from Miranda’s line.

　　“She’s here and she’s pissed,” Emily whispered. “You’ve got to get 
　　back here.”

　　“I’m doing everything I can,” I growled, trying to balance the 
　　carrying tray and the bag of baked goods on one arm and hold the 
　　phone with the other.

　　And thus the basic root of the hatred that existed between Emily and 
　　me. Since she was in the “senior” assistant position, I was more of 
　　Miranda’s personal assistant, there to fetch those Coffees and 
　　meals, help her kids with their Homework, and run all over the city 
　　to retrieve the perfect dishes for her dinner parties. Emily did her 
　　expenses, made her travel arrangements, and―the biggest job of 
　　all―put through her personal clothing order every few months. So 
　　when I was out gathering the goodies each morning, Emily was left 
　　alone to handle all of the ringing phone lines and an alert, 
　　early-morning Miranda and all of her demands. I hated her for being 
　　able to wear sleeveless shirts to work, where she wouldn’t ever have 
　　to leave the warm office six times a day to race around New York 
　　fetching, searching, hunting, gathering. She hated me for having 
　　excuses to leave the office, where she knew I always took longer 
　　than necessary to talk on my Cell Phone and smoke cigarettes.

　　The walk back to the building usually took longer than the walk to 
　　Starbucks, since I had to distribute my Coffees and snacks. I 
　　preferred to hand them out to the Homeless, a small band of regulars 
　　who hung out on stoops and slept in doorways on 57th Street, 
　　thumbing the city’s attempts to “clean them up.” The police always 
　　hustled them away before rush hour kicked into high gear, but they 
　　were still hanging out when I was doing the day’s first coffee run. 
　　There was something so fantastic―invigorating, really―in making sure 
　　that these overpriced, Elias-sponsored Coffee faves made it into the 
　　hands of the city’s most undesirable people.

　　The urine-soaked man who slept outside the Chase Bank got a daily 
　　Mocha Frappuccino. He never actually woke up to accept it, but I 
　　left it (with a straw, of course) next to his left elbow each 
　　morning, and it was often gone―along with him―when I returned for my 
　　next Coffee run a few hours later.

　　The old lady who propped herself up on her cart and set out a 
　　cardboard sign that readNO Home/CAN CLEAN/NEED FOOD got the Caramel 
　　Macchiato. I soon found her name was Theresa, and I used to buy her 
　　a tall latte, like Miranda’s. She always said thank you, but she 
　　never made a move to taste it while it was still hot. When I finally 
　　asked her if she wanted me to stop bringing them, she vigorously 
　　shook her head and mumbled that she hates to be picky, but she’d 
　　actually like something sweeter, that the coffee was too strong. The 
　　next day I had her coffee flavored with vanilla and topped with 
　　whipped cream. Was this better? Oh yes, it was much, much better, 
　　but maybe now it was a touch too sweet. One more day and I finally 
　　got it right: it turns out Theresa liked her Coffee unflavored, 
　　topped with whipped cream and some caramel syrup. She flashed a 
　　near-toothless smile and began guzzling it each and every day, the 
　　moment I handed it to her.

　　The third Coffee went to Rio, the Nigerian who sold CDs off a 
　　blanket. He didn’t appear to be Homeless, but he walked over to me 
　　one morning when I was handing Theresa her daily fix and said, or, 
　　rather, sang, “Yo, yo, yo, you like the Starbucks fairy or what? 
　　Where’s mine?” I handed him a grande Amaretto Cappuccino the next 
　　day, and we’d been friends ever since.

　　I expensed twenty-four dollars more every day on Coffee than 
　　necessary (Miranda’s single latte should’ve cost a mere four 
　　dollars) to take yet another passive-aggressive swipe at the 
　　company, my personal reprimand to them for Miranda Priestly’s free 
　　rein. I handed them out to the filthy, the smelly, and the crazy 
　　because that―and not the wasted money―was what wouldreally piss them 
　　off.

　　By the time I made it to the lobby, Pedro, the heavily accented 
　　Mexican delivery boy from Mangia, was chatting in Spanish with 
　　Eduardo near the elevator bank.

　　“Hey, here’s our girlie,” said Pedro as a few Clackers peered over 
　　at us. “I’ve got the usual: bacon, sausage, and one nasty-looking 
　　cheese thing. You only ordered one today! Don’t know how you eat 
　　this shit and stay so thin, girl.” He grinned. I suppressed the urge 
　　to tell him he didn’t have a clue what thin looked like. Pedro knew 
　　full well that I was not the one eating his breakfasts, but like 
　　every one of the dozen or so people I spoke to before eightA .M. 
　　each day, he didn’t really know the details. I handed him a ten, as 
　　usual, for the $3.99 breakfast, and headed upstairs.

　　She was on the phone when I entered the office, her snakeskin Gucci 
　　trench draped across the top of my desk. My blood pressure increased 
　　tenfold. Would it kill her to take the extra two steps over to the 
　　closet, open it, and hang up her own coat? Why did she have to take 
　　it off and fling it over my desk? I put down the latte, looked over 
　　at Emily, who was too busy answering three phone lines to notice me, 
　　and hung up the snakeskin. I shook off my own coat and bent down to 
　　toss it underneath my desk, since mine might infect hers if they 
　　mingled in the closet.

　　I grabbed two raw sugars, a stirrer, and a napkin from a stock I 
　　kept in my desk drawer and wrapped them all together. I briefly 
　　considered spitting in the drink but was able to restrain myself. 
　　Next, I pulled a small china plate from the overhead bin and dumped 
　　out the greasy meat and the oozing Danish, wiping my hands on her 
　　dirty dry cleaning, which was hidden beneath my desk so she couldn’t 
　　see it hadn’t been picked up yet. I was theoretically supposed to 
　　clean her plate each day in the sink in our mock-up kitchen, but I 
　　just couldn’t bring myself to bother. The humiliation of doing her 
　　dishes in front of everyone prompted me to wipe it down with tissues 
　　after each meal and scrape off any leftover cheese with my 
　　fingernails. If it was really dirty or had been sitting for a long 
　　time, I’d open a bottle of the Pellegrino we kept by the case and 
　　dump a little bit on. I figured she should be thankful I wasn’t 
　　using a spritz or two of desk cleaner. I was reasonably sure that I 
　　had reached a new moral low―what was worrisome was that I’d sunk to 
　　it so naturally.

　　“Remember, I want my girls smiling,” she was saying into the phone. 
　　I could tell from her tone she was talking to Lucia, the fashion 
　　director who’d be in charge of the upcoming Brazil shoot, about how 
　　the models should appear. “Happy, lots of teeth, clean healthy 
　　girls. No brooding, no anger, no frowning, no dark makeup. I want 
　　them shining. I mean it, Lucia: I will accept nothing less.”

　　I set the plate on the edge of her desk and placed the latte and the 
　　napkin with all necessary accessories next to it. She didn’t look at 
　　me. I paused for a moment to see if she’d hand me a pile of papers 
　　off her desk, things to fax or find or file, but she ignored me and 
　　I walked out. Eight-thirtyA .M. I’d been awake now for three full 
　　hours, felt like I’d already worked for twelve, and could finally 
　　sit down for the very first time all morning. Just as I was logging 
　　on to Hotmail, anticipating some fun e-mails from people on the 
　　outside, she walked out. The belted jacket cinched her already tiny 
　　waist and complemented the perfectly fitted pencil skirt she wore 
　　beneath it. She looked dynamite.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah. The latte is ice cold. I don’t understand why. You were 
　　certainly gone long enough! Bring me another.”

　　I inhaled deeply and concentrated on keeping the look of hatred off 
　　my face. Miranda set the offending latte on my desk and flipped 
　　through the new issue ofVanity Fair that a staffer had set on the 
　　table for her. I could feel Emily watching me and knew her look 
　　would be one of sympathy and anger: she felt bad that I had to 
　　repeat the hellish ordeal all over again, but she hated me for 
　　daring to be upset about it. After all, wouldn’t a million girls die 
　　for my job?

　　And so with an audible sigh―something I’d perfected lately, so it 
　　was just enough Miranda could hear but not nearly enough she could 
　　ever call me on it―I once again put on my coat and willed my legs to 
　　move toward the elevators. It was going to be another long, long 
　　day.

　　The second coffee run in twenty minutes went much more smoothly; the 
　　lines at Starbucks had thinned a little and Marion had come on duty. 
　　She herself got to work on a tall latte as soon as I walked in the 
　　door. I didn’t bother overspending on a larger order this time 
　　because I was too desperate to just get back and sit down, but I did 
　　addventi cappuccinos for both Emily and me. Just as I was paying for 
　　the coffee, my phone rang. Goddamn it to hell, this woman was 
　　impossible. Insatiable, impatient, impossible. I hadn’t been gone 
　　for more than four minutes; she couldn’t possibly be freaking out 
　　yet. Again, I balanced my tray in one hand and pulled my phone from 
　　my coat pocket. I’d already decided that such behavior on her part 
　　warranted my having another cigarette―if just to hold up her Coffee 
　　a few minutes longer―when I saw that it was Lily calling from her 
　　Home phone.

　　“Hey, bad time?” she asked, sounding excited. I looked at my watch 
　　and saw that she should’ve been in class.

　　“Um, sort of. I’m on my second Coffee run, which is really great. 
　　I’m really, really enjoying myself, just in case you were wondering. 
　　What’s up? Don’t you have class now?”

　　“Yeah, but I went out with Pink-Shirt Boy again last night and we 
　　each drank a few too many margaritas. Like, eight too many. He’s 
　　still passed out here, so I can’t just leave him. But that’s not why 
　　I’m calling.”

　　“Yeah?” I was barely listening, since one of the cappuccinos was 
　　starting to leak and I had the phone wedged in between my neck and 
　　my shoulder as I used my one free hand to pluck a cigarette from the 
　　box and light it.

　　“My landlord had the nerve to knock on my door at eight o’clock this 
　　morning to tell me that I’m being evicted,” she said with not a 
　　little bit of glee in her voice.

　　“Evicted? Lil, why? What are you going to do?”

　　“It seems they finally caught on that I’m not Sandra Gers and that 
　　she hasn’t lived here in six months. Since she’s technically not 
　　family, she wasn’t allowed to pass down the rent-controlled 
　　apartment to me. I knew that, of course, so I’ve just been saying 
　　I’m her. I don’t really know how they found out. But whatev, it 
　　doesn’t really matter, because now you and I can live together! Your 
　　lease with Shanti and Kendra is just month by month, right? You 
　　subletted because you had no place to live, right?”

　　“Right.”

　　“Well, now you do! We can get a place together, anywhere we like!”

　　“That’s great!” It sounded hollow to my ears even though I was 
　　genuinely excited.

　　“So you’re up for it?” she asked, her enthusiasm sounding a bit 
　　dampened.

　　“Lil, definitely. Honestly, it’s an awesome idea. I don’t mean to 
　　sound negative, it’s just that it’s sleeting and I’m standing 
　　outside and I have burning hot Coffee running down my left arm . . 
　　.”Beep-beep. The other line rang, and even though I almost burned my 
　　neck with the lit end of the cigarette while trying to pull my phone 
　　away from my ear, I was able to see that it was Emily calling.

　　“Shit, Lil, it’s Miranda calling. I’ve got to run. But congrats on 
　　getting evicted! I’m so excited for us. I’ll call you later, OK?”

　　“OK, I’ll talk to―”

　　I had already clicked over and mentally prepared myself for the 
　　barrage.

　　“Me again,” Emily said tightly. “What the hell is going on? It’s a 
　　fucking Coffee, for chrissake. You forget that I used to do your 
　　job, and I know it doesn’t take that long to―”

　　“What?” I said loudly, holding a few fingers over the microphone on 
　　the receiver. “What’d you say? I can’t hear you. Well, if you can 
　　hear me, I’ll be back in just a minute!” And I clicked my phone shut 
　　and buried it deep in my pocket. And even though I had at least half 
　　a Marlboro left, I dropped it on the sidewalk and ran back to work.

　　Miranda deigned to accept this slightly warmer latte and even gave 
　　us a few moments of peace between ten and eleven, when she sat in 
　　her office with the door closed, cooing to B-DAD. I’d officially met 
　　him for the first time the week before, when I’d dropped the Book 
　　off that Wednesday night around nine. He had been removing his coat 
　　from the closet in the foyer and spent the next ten minutes 
　　referring to himself in the third person. Since that meeting, he had 
　　paid me extra-special attention when I let myself in each night, 
　　always taking a few minutes to ask about my day or compliment me on 
　　a job well done. Naturally, none of these niceties seemed to rub off 
　　on his wife, but at least he was pleasant to be around.

　　I was just about to begin calling some of the PR people to see about 
　　getting a few more decent clothes to wear to work when Miranda’s 
　　voice shook me from my thoughts. “Emily, I’d like my lunch.” She had 
　　called from her office to no one in particular, since Emily could 
　　mean either of us. The real Emily looked at me and nodded, and I 
　　knew it was OK to move. The number for Smith and Wollensky was 
　　programmed into my desk phone, and I recognized the voice on the 
　　other end as the new girl.

　　“Hey, Kim, it’s Andrea from Miranda Priestly’s office. Is Sebastian 
　　there?”

　　“Oh, hi, um, what did you say your name was again?” No matter that I 
　　called at the exact same time, twice a week, and had already 
　　identified myself―she always acted as though we’d never spoken.

　　“From Miranda Priestly’s office. AtRunway . Listen, I don’t mean to 
　　be rude”―yes, actually, I do―“but I’m kind of in a hurry. Could you 
　　just put Sebastian on?” If anyone else had answered I would’ve been 
　　able to just tell that person to put in an order for Miranda’s 
　　usual, but since this one was too dumb to be trusted, I had learned 
　　to ask for the manager himself.

　　“Um, OK, let me check and see if he’s available.”Trust me, Kim, he’s 
　　available. Miranda Priestly is his life.

　　“Andy, dear, how are you?” Sebastian breathed into the phone. “I 
　　hope you’re calling because our favorite fashion editor would like 
　　some lunch today, yes?”

　　I wondered what he’d say if I told him, just once, that it wasn’t 
　　Miranda who was looking for lunch, but me. After all, this wasn’t 
　　exactly a takeout joint, but they made a special exception for the 
　　queen herself.

　　“Oh, yes, indeed. She was just saying how much she was in the mood 
　　for something delicious from your restaurant, and she also said to 
　　send her love.” If under threat of death or dismemberment Miranda 
　　wouldn’t have been able to identify the name of the place that made 
　　her lunch each day, never even mind the name of its daytime manager, 
　　but he always seemed so happy when I said something like this. Today 
　　he was so excited he giggled.

　　“Fab! That’s just fabulous! We’ll have it ready for you as soon as 
　　you get here,” he called with fresh excitement in his voice. “Can’t 
　　wait! And give her my love, too, of course!”

　　“Of course I will. See you soon.” It was exhausting to stroke his 
　　ego so enthusiastically, but he made my job so much easier it was 
　　well worth it. Every day that Miranda didn’t have lunch out, I 
　　served her the same meal at her desk, and she leisurely ate it 
　　behind closed doors. I kept a supply of china plates in the bins 
　　above my desk for this purpose. Most were samples sent by designers 
　　whose new “Home” lines had just come out, although some I just took 
　　directly from the dining room. It would have been too annoying to 
　　have to keep stock of things like gravy trays and steak knives and 
　　linen napkins, though, so Sebastian was always sure to provide those 
　　with the meal.

　　And once again I shrugged on my black wool coat and jammed my 
　　cigarettes and phone in the pocket and headed outside, into a late 
　　February day that seemed to get only grayer as it progressed. 
　　Although it was just a fifteen-minute walk to the restaurant on 49th 
　　and Third, I considered calling for a car but thought better of it 
　　when I felt the clean air in my lungs. I lit a cigarette and drew 
　　the smoke in; when I exhaled, I wasn’t sure if it was smoke or cold 
　　air or irritation, but it felt damn good.

　　Dodging the aimlessly meandering tourists had become easier. I used 
　　to stare in disgust at pedestrians on Cell Phones, but given my 
　　hectic days, I’d become a walking talker. I pulled my cell out and 
　　called Alex’s school where, according to my fuzzy recollection, he 
　　could possibly be eating his lunch in the faculty lounge at that 
　　moment.

　　It rang twice before I heard a high-pitched, pinched woman’s voice 
　　answer.

　　“Hello. You’ve reached PS 277 and this is Mrs. Whitmore speaking. 
　　How may I help you?”

　　“Is Alex Fineman there?”

　　“And who may I ask is calling?”

　　“This is Andrea Sachs, Alex’s girlfriend.”

　　“Ah, yes, Andrea! We’ve all heard so much about you.” Her words were 
　　so clipped she sounded as though she might choke any moment.

　　“Oh, really? That’s . . . uh, that’s good. I’ve heard a lot about 
　　you too, of course. Alex says wonderful things about everyone at 
　　school.”

　　“Well, isn’t that nice. But seriously, Andrea, it sounds like you 
　　have quite some job there! How interesting it must be, working for 
　　such a talented woman. You’re a lucky girl, indeed.”

　　Ah, yes. Mrs. Whitmore. I am a lucky girlindeed.I’m so lucky, you 
　　have no idea. I can’t tell you how lucky I felt when I was sent out 
　　just yesterday afternoon to purchase tampons for my boss, only to be 
　　told that I’d bought the wrong ones and asked why I do nothing 
　　right. And luck is probably the only way to explain why I get to 
　　sort another person’s sweat- and food-stained clothing each morning 
　　before eight and arrange to have it cleaned. Oh, wait! I think what 
　　actually makes me luckiest of all is getting to talk to breeders all 
　　over the tristate area for three straight weeks in search of the 
　　perfect French bulldog puppy so two incredibly spoiled and 
　　unfriendly little girls can each have their own pet. Yes, that’s it!

　　“Oh, yes, well, it is a fantastic opportunity,” I said by rote. “A 
　　job a million girls would die for.”

　　“You can say that again, dear! And guess what? Alex just walked in. 
　　I’ll put him on.”

　　“Hey, Andy, what’s going on? How’s your day going?”

　　“Don’t ask. I’m on my way to pick up Her lunch right now. How’s your 
　　day?”

　　“Good, so far. My class has music today right after lunch, so I 
　　actually have an hour and a half free, which is nice. And then we 
　　get to cover more phonics exercises!” he said, sounding just a 
　　little defeated. “Even though it seems like they’re never going to 
　　learn how to actually read something.”

　　“Well, have there been any slashings today?”

　　“No.”

　　“So, how much can you ask for? You’ve had a relatively pain-free, 
　　bloodless day. Enjoy it. Save the whole reading concept for 
　　tomorrow. So, guess what? Lily called this morning. She finally got 
　　evicted from her place in Harlem, so we’re going to move in 
　　together. Fun, right?”

　　“Hey, congratulations! Couldn’t have been better timing for you. You 
　　guys will have a great time together. Come to think of it, it’s a 
　　little scary. Dealing with Lily full-time . . . and Lily’s guys . . 
　　. Promise we can stay at my place a lot?”

　　“Of course. But you’ll feel right at Home―it’ll be just like senior 
　　year all over again.”

　　“Too bad she’s losing that cheap apartment. Other than that, it’s 
　　great news.”

　　“Yeah, I’m psyched. Shanti and Kendra are fine, but I’m kind of done 
　　with the whole living-with-strangers thing.” I loved Indian food, 
　　but I did not love how the curry smell had seeped into everything I 
　　owned. “I’m going to see if Lil wants to meet for a drink tonight to 
　　celebrate. You up for it? We’ll meet somewhere in the East Village 
　　so it’s not too far for you.”

　　“Yeah, sure, sounds great. I’m running to Larchmont to watch Joey 
　　tonight, but I’ll be back in the city by eight. You won’t even be 
　　out of work by then, so I’ll meet Max and we can all meet up 
　　afterward. Hey, is Lily seeing anyone? Max could use a, well . . .”

　　“A what?” I laughed. “Go on, say it. Do you think my friend is a 
　　whore? She’s just free-spirited, is all. And is she seeing someone? 
　　What kind of question is that? Someone named Pink-Shirt Boy stayed 
　　over there last night. I don’t think I know his real name.”

　　“Whatever. Anyway, the bell just rang. Call me when you’re done 
　　dropping off the Book.”

　　“Will do. ’Bye.”

　　I was about to stash the phone when it rang again. The number wasn’t 
　　familiar, though, and I answered it out of sheer relief that it 
　　wasn’t Miranda or Emily.

　　“Mir―er, hello?” I’d taken to automatically answering my cell and 
　　Home phone “Miranda Priestly’s office,” which was supremely 
　　embarrassing when it was anyone except my parents or Lily. Had to 
　　work on that.

　　“Is this the lovely Andrea Sachs whom I inadvertently terrified at 
　　Marshall’s party?” asked a somewhat hoarse and very sexy voice on 
　　the other end. Christian! I’d been almost relieved when he hadn’t 
　　resurfaced anywhere after massaging my hand with his lips. But all 
　　the feelings of wanting to impress him with my wit and charm that 
　　first night came rushing back, and I quickly vowed to play it cool.

　　“It is. And who may I ask is this? There were a number of men who 
　　terrified me that night for dozens of different and varied 
　　reasons.”OK, so far, so good. Deep breath, be cool.

　　“I didn’t realize I had so much competition,” he said smoothly. “But 
　　I suppose I shouldn’t be surprised. How have you been, Andrea?”

　　“Fine. Great, actually,” I lied quickly, remembering aCosmo article 
　　I’d read that had exhorted me to “keep it light and airy and happy” 
　　when talking to a new guy because most “normal” guys didn’t respond 
　　so well to hard-bitten cynicism. “Work is going really well. I’m 
　　loving my job, actually! It’s been really interesting lately―a lot 
　　to learn, tons of stuff going on. Yeah, it’s great. What about 
　　you?”Don’t talk about yourself too much, don’t dominate the 
　　conversation, get him comfortable enough to chat about his favorite 
　　and most familiar topic: him .

　　“You’re a rather deft liar, Andrea. To an untrained ear that almost 
　　sounded believable, but you know what they say, don’t you? You can’t 
　　bullshit a bullshitter. Don’t worry, though. I’ll let you get away 
　　with it this time.” I opened my mouth to deny the accusation, but 
　　instead I just laughed. A perceptive one indeed. “Let me get right 
　　to the point here, because I’m about to get on a plane for D.C. and 
　　security doesn’t look all too happy that I’m walking through a metal 
　　detector while talking on the phone. Do you have plans for Saturday 
　　night?”

　　I hated when people phrased their questions that way, asked if you 
　　had plans before they told you what they had in mind. Did his 
　　girfriend need someone to run errands for her and he thought I fit 
　　the bill? Or maybe he needed someone to walk his dog while he gave 
　　yet another eight-hour-long interview to theNew York Times ? I was 
　　considering what noncommittal way I could answer that question when 
　　he said, “So, I have a reservation at Babbo this Saturday. Nine 
　　o’clock. A bunch of friends will be there, too, mostly magazine 
　　editors and pretty interesting people. An editor fromThe Buzz, and a 
　　couple writers fromThe New Yorker . Good crowd. You up for it?” At 
　　that exact moment, an ambulance roared past me with its siren 
　　wailing, lights flashing in a fruitless attempt to speed through the 
　　hopelessly gridlocked traffic. As usual, the drivers ignored the 
　　ambulance and it sat at the red light like all the other vehicles.

　　Had he just asked me out? Yes, I thought that’s exactly what had 
　　just happened. He was asking me out! He was asking me out. Christian 
　　Collinsworth was asking me on a date―a Saturday-night date, to be 
　　specific, and to Babbo, where he just so happened to have a 
　　prime-time reservation with a group of smart, interesting people, 
　　people just like him. Never even mind theNew Yorkerwriters! I racked 
　　my brain, trying to remember if I’d mentioned to him at the party 
　　that Babbo was the one restaurant I most wanted to try in New York, 
　　that I loved Italian and knew how much Miranda loved it and I was 
　　dying to go. I’d even thought about blowing a week’s pay on a meal 
　　and had called to make a reservation for Alex and me, but they’d 
　　been booked solid for the next five months. I hadn’t been asked on a 
　　date by anyone other than Alex in three years.

　　“Um, Christian, golly, I’d love to,” I started, trying to forget 
　　immediately that I’d just said “golly.”Golly! Who said that? The 
　　scene where Baby proudly announces to Johnny that she’d carried a 
　　watermelon flashed to mind, but I pushed it back and willed myself 
　　to forge forward despite the humiliation. “I’d really love to”―yes, 
　　you idiot, you just said that, try to make some progress here―“but I 
　　just can’t do it. I, um, I already have plans for Saturday.” A good 
　　response overall, I thought. I was shouting over the noise of the 
　　siren, but I thought I still sounded somewhat dignified. No need to 
　　be available for a date that was only two days away, and no real 
　　need to reveal existence of boyfriend . . . after all, it really 
　　wasn’t any of his Business. Right?

　　“Do you really have plans, Andrea, or do you think your boyfriend 
　　would disapprove of you going out with another man?” He was Fishing, 
　　I could tell.

　　“Either way has nothing to do with you,” I said prissily, and I 
　　actually rolled my eyes at myself. I crossed Third Avenue without 
　　noticing that the light was against me and almost got mowed down by 
　　a minivan.

　　“OK, well, I’ll let you off this time. But I’ll be asking again. And 
　　I think next time you’ll say yes.”

　　“Oh, really? What gives you that impression?” The confidence that 
　　had seemed so sexy before was now starting to sound a whole lot like 
　　arrogance. The only problem was that it made him sound even sexier.

　　“Just a hunch, Andrea, just a hunch. And no need to worry that 
　　pretty little head of yours―or your boyfriend’s―I was just extending 
　　a friendly invitation for a good meal and good company. Maybe he’d 
　　like to join us, Andrea? Your boyfriend. He must be a great guy, I’d 
　　really like to meet him.”

　　“No!” I almost shouted, horrified at the thought of the two of them 
　　sitting across a table from each other, each so amazing in such 
　　radically different ways. I’d be ashamed for Christian to see Alex’s 
　　wholesomeness, his do-gooder ways. To Christian, Alex would seem 
　　like a na&iuml;ve hick. And I’d be even more ashamed for Alex to see, 
　　with his own eyes, all the ugly things I found so incredibly 
　　attractive about Christian: the style, the cockiness, a 
　　self-assuredness so rock-solid it seemed impossible to insult him.

　　“No.” I laughed or, rather, forced a laugh, as I tried to make it 
　　sound casual. “I’m not so sure that’s a good idea. Although I’m sure 
　　he’d just love to meet you, too.”

　　He laughed with me, but it had turned mocking, patronizing. “I was 
　　just kidding, Andrea. I’m sure your boyfriend’s a really great guy, 
　　but I’m not particularly interested in meeting him.”

　　“Well, of course. Sure. I mean, I knew what you―”

　　“Listen, I’ve got to run. Why don’t you give me a call if you change 
　　your mind . . . or your ‘plans,’ OK? Offer’s still open. Oh, and 
　　have a great day.” And before I could say another word, he’d hung 
　　up.

　　What the hell had just happened? I ran through it again: Hot Smart 
　　Writer had somehow found my cell number, called it, and fully asked 
　　me on a date for Saturday night to Hot Trendy Restaurant. I wasn’t 
　　clear whether he knew ahead of time if I had a boyfriend or not, but 
　　he didn’t appear particularly daunted by the information. The only 
　　thing I knew for sure was that I’d spent way too long chatting on 
　　the phone, a fact confirmed by a quick glance at my watch. It had 
　　been thirty-two minutes since I’d left the office, longer than the 
　　time it usually took me to get lunch and come back.

　　I stashed the phone and realized I had already made it to the 
　　restaurant. I pulled open the lumbering wooden door and stepped into 
　　the hushed, darkened dining room. Even though every table was filled 
　　with midtown bankers and lawyers gnawing on their favorite steaks, 
　　there was barely any noise at all, as if the plush carpeting and 
　　manly color scheme just absorbed all the sound.

　　“Andrea!” I heard Sebastian cry from the hostess stand. He beelined 
　　toward me as though I might be holding the last of a life-saving 
　　medication. “We’re just all so glad you’re here!” Two young girls in 
　　crisp gray skirt suits nodded seriously behind him.

　　“Oh, really? Why is that?” I could never help myself toying with 
　　Sebastian, just a little. He was such an unbelievable kiss-ass.

　　He leaned over conspiratorially, his excitement palpable. “Well, you 
　　know how the entire staff here at Smith and Wollensky feels about 
　　Ms. Priestly, don’t you?Runway is such a gorgeous magazine, what 
　　with all the beautiful shoots and stunning style and, of course, 
　　fascinating, literate articles. We all just adore it!”

　　“Literate articles, huh?” I asked, suppressing the huge smile that 
　　was threatening to emerge. He nodded proudly and turned as one of 
　　the suited helpers tapped him on the shoulder to hand him a tote 
　　bag.

　　He literally cried out in joy. “Ah-hah! Here we have it, one 
　　perfectly prepared lunch for one perfect editor―and one perfect 
　　assistant,” he added while winking at me.

　　“Thank you, Sebastian, we both appreciate it.” I opened the natural 
　　cotton tote, a bag that looked just like thoseüber -cool ones from 
　　the Strand that all the NYU students slung over their shoulder, but 
　　without the logo, and made sure everything was right. 
　　One-and-a-quarter-pound ribeye, bleeding all over the container, so 
　　raw it just might not have been cooked at all. Check. Two baked 
　　potatoes the size of small kittens, each steaming hot. Check. One 
　　small side container of smashed potatoes, made soft with lots of 
　　heavy cream and extra butter. Check. Precisely eight perfect stalks 
　　of asparagus with the tips looking plump and juicy and the ends 
　　shaved to a clean, white finish. Check. There was also a metal gravy 
　　boat full of softened butter, a pinch-box overflowing with grainy 
　　kosher salt, a wooden-handled steak knife, and a crisp white linen 
　　napkin, which today was folded into the shape of a pleated skirt. 
　　How adorable. Sebastian waited to see if I liked it.

　　“Very nice, Sebastian,” I said as though I were praising a puppy for 
　　going number two outside. “You really outdid yourself today.”

　　He beamed and then looked at the ground in practiced humility. 
　　“Well, thank you. You know how I feel about Ms. Priestly, and, well, 
　　it’s really an honor to, well, you know . . .”

　　“Prepare her lunch?” I supplied, helpfully.

　　“Well, yes. Exactly. You know what I mean.”

　　“Yes, of course I do, Sebastian. She’ll love it, I’m sure.” I didn’t 
　　have the heart to tell him that I immediately unfolded all of his 
　　creations because the Ms. Priestly he so adored would throw a hissy 
　　fit if faced with a napkin in the shape of anything other than a 
　　napkin―never mind a bowling bag or a high-heeled shoe. I tucked the 
　　bag under my arm and turned to leave, but just then my phone rang.

　　Sebastian looked at me expectantly, fervently hoping that the voice 
　　on the other line of my Cell Phone would be his love, his reason for 
　　living. He wasn’t let down.

　　“Is this Emily? Emily, is that you, I can barely hear you!” 
　　Miranda’s voice came over the line in a shrill, angry staccato.

　　“Hello, Miranda. Yes, this is Andrea.” I stated calmly while 
　　Sebastian visibly swooned at the sound of her name.

　　“Are you preparing my lunch yourself, Andrea? Because according to 
　　my clock, I asked for it thirty-five minutes ago. I cannot think of 
　　a single reason why―if you were doing your job properly―my lunch 
　　would not be at my desk yet. Can you?”

　　She got my name right! A small success, but no time to celebrate.

　　“Uh, um, well, I’m very sorry it’s taken so long, but there was a 
　　little mix-up with―”

　　“You do know just how uninterested I am in such details, do you 
　　not?”

　　“Yes, of course I understand, and it won’t be long before―”

　　“I am calling to tell you that I want my lunch, and I want itnow . 
　　There’s really not much room for nuance, Emily. I. Want. My. Lunch. 
　　Now!” With that, she hung up the phone, and my hands were shaking so 
　　badly I dropped my cell on the floor. It might as well have been 
　　covered in burning arsenic.

　　Sebastian, who looked ready to pass out from the action, swooped 
　　down to retrieve the phone and hand it back to me.

　　“Is she upset with us, Andrea? I hope she doesn’t think we let her 
　　down! Does she? Does she think that?” His mouth pursed into a tight 
　　oval and the already prominent veins in his forehead pulsed, and I 
　　wanted to hate him as much as I hated her, but I just felt sorry for 
　　him. Why did this man, this man who seemed remarkable only to the 
　　extent that he was so unremarkable, why did he care so much about 
　　Miranda Priestly? Why was he so invested in pleasing her, impressing 
　　her, providing for her? Perhaps he should take over my job, I 
　　thought, because I was going to quit. Yes, that was it. I was going 
　　to march back to that office and quit. Who needed her shit? What 
　　gave her the right to talk to me, to anyone, like that? The 
　　position? The power? The prestige? The goddamn Prada? Where, in a 
　　just universe, was this acceptable behavior?

　　The receipt I was supposed to sign every day charging the 
　　ninety-five-dollar meal to Elias-Clark was resting on the podium, 
　　and I quickly scrawled an illegible signature. Whether it was mine 
　　or Miranda’s or Emily’s or Mahatma Gandhi’s at this point I couldn’t 
　　even be sure, but it wouldn’t matter. I grabbed the bag of food that 
　　redefined the term “lunch meat” and stomped back outside, leaving a 
　　very fragile Sebastian to deal with himself. I threw myself in a cab 
　　the moment I hit the street, nearly knocking an elderly man off his 
　　feet. No time to be concerned. I had a job to quit. Even with the 
　　midday traffic, we covered the few blocks in ten minutes, and I 
　　threw the cabbie a twenty. I would’ve given him fifty if I’d had it 
　　and figured out a way to recoup it from Elias, but there were none 
　　in my wallet. He immediately began counting out change, but I 
　　slammed the door and ran. Let that twenty go to caring for a little 
　　girl somewhere or fixing a hot water heater, I decided. Or even for 
　　a few postshift beers at the cab park in Queens―whatever the cabbie 
　　did with it would somehow be nobler than buying yet another cup of 
　　Starbucks.

　　Full of self-righteous indignation, I stormed inside the building 
　　and ignored the disapproving stares from the small group of Clackers 
　　in the corner. I saw Benji stepping off the Bergman elevators but 
　　quickly turned my back so I didn’t waste any more time, swiped my 
　　card, and threw my hip against the turnstile. Shit! The metal bar 
　　smacked against my pelvic bone and I knew I’d have a splotchy purple 
　　bruise within minutes. I looked up to see two rows of glimmering 
　　white teeth and the fat, sweating face that formed around them. 
　　Eduardo. He had to be kidding. He just had to be.

　　I quickly flashed him my best nasty look, the one that said, quite 
　　simply,Just die! but it didn’t work today. Maintaining full eye 
　　contact, I swiveled around to the next turnstile in the line, swiped 
　　my card lightning-fast, and lunged against the bar. He’d managed to 
　　lock it just in time, and I stood there as he let the Clackers go 
　　through the first turnstile I’d tried, one by one. Six in all, and I 
　　still stood there, so frustrated I thought I might cry. Eduardo was 
　　not sympathetic.

　　“Girlfriend, don’t look so down. This ain’t torture, it’s fun. Now, 
　　please. Pay attention, because . . .I think we’re alone now. There 
　　doesn’t seem to be anyone a-rou-ound. I think we’re alone now. The 
　　beatin’ of our hearts is the only sou-ound .”

　　“Eduardo! How on earth am I supposed to act out that one? I don’t 
　　have time for this shit right now!”

　　“OK, OK. No actin’ this time, just singin’. I’ll start, you 
　　finish.Children behave! That’s what they say when we’re together. 
　　And watch how you play! They don’t understand, and so we’re . . . ”

　　I figured I wouldn’t have to quit if I ever actually made it 
　　upstairs because I’d be fired by then anyway. Might as well make 
　　someone else’s day.“Running just as fast as we can,” I continued, 
　　not missing a beat.“Holdin’ on to one another’s hand. Tryin’ to get 
　　away into the night and then you put your arms around me and we 
　　tumble to the ground and then you say . . .”

　　I leaned in closer when I noticed that the jerk from day one, 
　　Mickey, was trying to listen, and Eduardo finished it off:“I think 
　　we’re alone now. There doesn’t seem to be anyone a-rou-ound. I think 
　　we’re alone now. The beatin’ of our hearts is the only sou-ound!” He 
　　guffawed and threw his hand in the air. I slapped him high five, and 
　　I heard the metal bar click open.

　　“Have a good lunch, Andy!” he called, still grinning.

　　“You, too, Eduardo, you, too.”

　　The elevator ride was blissfully uneventful, and it wasn’t until I 
　　was standing directly outside the doors of our office suite that I 
　　decided I couldn’t quit. Aside from the obvious―that is, it’d be too 
　　terrifying to do it unprepared, she’d probably just look at me and 
　　say, “No, I won’t allow you to quit” and then what would I say?―I 
　　had to remember that it was only a year of my life. A single year to 
　　bypass many more of misery. One year, 12 months, 52 weeks, 365 days, 
　　of putting up with this garbage to do what I really wanted. It 
　　wasn’t too great a demand, and besides, I was too tired to even 
　　think about looking for another job. Way too tired.

　　Emily looked up at me when I walked in. “She’ll be right back. She 
　　just got called up to Mr. Ravitz’s office. Seriously, Andrea, what 
　　took you so long? You know that she comes down on me when you’re 
　　late, and what can I tell her? That you’re smoking cigarettes 
　　instead of buying her Coffee, or talking to your boyfriend instead 
　　of getting her lunch? It’s not fair―it’s really not.” She turned her 
　　attention back to her computer, a resigned expression on her face.

　　She was right, of course. It wasn’t fair. To me, to her, to any 
　　semicivilized human being. And I felt bad for making it more 
　　difficult for her, which I did every time I took a few extra minutes 
　　away from the office to relax and unwind. Because every second I was 
　　gone was another second that Miranda focused her relentless 
　　attention on Emily. I vowed to try harder.

　　“You’re totally right, Em, and I’m sorry. I’ll try harder.”

　　She looked genuinely surprised and a little bit pleased. “I’d really 
　　appreciate it, Andrea. I mean, I’ve done your job. Iknow how much it 
　　sucks. Trust me, there were days that I had to go out in the snow 
　　and the slush and the rain to get her Coffee five, six, seven times 
　　in a single day. I was so tired I could barely move―I know what it’s 
　　like! Sometimes she’d call me to ask where something was―her latte, 
　　her lunch, some special, sensitive-teeth toothpaste I’d been sent to 
　　find―it was comforting to discover that at least her teeth had a bit 
　　of sensitivity―and I hadn’t even left the building yet. Hadn’t even 
　　gotten outside! That’s just her, Andy. That’s just how it is. You 
　　can’t fight it anymore, or you’ll never survive. She doesn’t mean 
　　any harm by it, she really doesn’t. That’s just the way she is.”

　　I nodded and I understood, but I just couldn’t accept that. I hadn’t 
　　worked anywhere else, but I just couldn’t believe that all bosses 
　　everywhere acted like this. But maybe they did?

　　I carried the lunch bag over to my desk and began the preparations 
　　for serving her. One by one, I used my bare hands to pluck the food 
　　from its heat-sealed to-go containers and arrange it (stylishly, I 
　　hoped) on one of the china plates from the overhead bin. Slowing 
　　only to wipe my now greasy hands on a pair of her dirty Versace 
　　pants I hadn’t yet sent to the cleaners, I placed the plate on the 
　　teak and tile serving tray that resided under my desk. Next to it 
　　went the gravy boat full of butter, the salt, and the silverware 
　　wrapped in a linen-pleated skirt-no-longer. A quick survey of my 
　　artistry revealed a missing Pellegrino. Better hurry―she’d be back 
　　any minute! I dashed to one of the minikitchens and palmed a fistful 
　　of ice cubes, blowing on them to keep them from freezer-burning my 
　　hands. Blowing was only one itsy, bitsy, teensy step from licking 
　　them―do I do it? No! Be above it, rise above it. Do not spit in her 
　　food or gum her ice cubes. You’re a bigger person than that!

　　Her office was still empty by the time I made it back, and the only 
　　thing left to do was pour the bottled water and place the whole 
　　orchestrated tray on her desk. She’d come back and perch at her 
　　mammoth desk and call out for someone to close her doors. And this 
　　would be one time I’d jump up happily, enthusiastically, because it 
　　meant not only that she’d sit quietly behind those closed doors for 
　　a good half hour, on the phone with B-DAD, but also that it was time 
　　for us to eat as well. One of us could race down to the dining room 
　　and grab the very first thing she saw and race back so the other 
　　could go. We would try to hide our food under our desks and behind 
　　our computer screens just in case she came out unexpectedly. If 
　　there was a single unspoken but still irrefutable rule, it was that 
　　members of theRunway staff do not eat in front of Miranda Priestly. 
　　Period.

　　My watch said it was quarter after two. My stomach said it was late 
　　evening. It had been seven hours since I’d shoved a chocolate scone 
　　down my throat on the walk back to the office from Starbucks, and I 
　　was so hungry I considered gnawing on her ribeye.

　　“Em, I might pass out, I’m so hungry. I think I’m going to run down 
　　and pick something up. Can I get you something?”

　　“Are you crazy? You haven’t served her lunch yet. She’ll be back any 
　　minute.”

　　“I’m serious. I really don’t feel well. I don’t think I can wait.” 
　　The sleep deprivation and the low blood sugar were combining to make 
　　me dizzy. I wasn’t sure I’d be able to carry the steak tray into her 
　　office even if she did come back sometime soon.

　　“Andrea, be rational! What if you run into her in the elevator or in 
　　reception? She’d know that you left the office. She’d freak! It’s 
　　not worth the risk. Hold on a sec―I’ll get you something.” She 
　　grabbed her change purse and headed out of the office. Not four 
　　seconds later, I saw Miranda making her way down the hall toward me. 
　　Any thoughts of dizziness or hunger or exhaustion disappeared the 
　　moment I spotted her tight, frowning face, and I flew out of my seat 
　　to put the tray on her desk before she reached it herself.

　　I landed in my seat, head spinning, mouth dry, and totally 
　　disoriented, just before her first Jimmy Choo crossed the threshold. 
　　She didn’t so much as glance in my direction or, thankfully, seem to 
　　notice that the real Emily wasn’t at her desk. I had a feeling that 
　　the meeting she’d just had with Mr. Ravitz hadn’t gone so well, 
　　although it could have just been her lingering resentment at having 
　　to leave her office to go see someone else in theirs. Mr. Ravitz 
　　was, so far, the only person in the entire building whom Miranda 
　　rushed to accommodate.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah! What is this? Please tell me, what on earth is this?”

　　I raced into her office and stood before her desk, where we both 
　　looked down at what was, quite obviously, the same lunch she ate 
　　whenever she didn’t go out. A quick mental checklist revealed that 
　　nothing was missing or out of place or on the wrong side or cooked 
　　incorrectly. What was her problem?

　　“Um, it’s, uh, well, it’s your lunch,” I said quietly, making a 
　　genuine effort not to sound sarcastic, which was difficult, 
　　considering my statement was supremely obvious. “Is something 
　　wrong?”

　　In all fairness, I think she just parted her lips, but to my 
　　near-delirious self, it looked like she was baring actual pointed 
　　fangs.

　　“Is something wrong?” she mimicked in a high-pitched voice that 
　　sounded nothing like my own, nothing human. She narrowed her eyes to 
　　slits and leaned closer, still refusing, as always, to raise her 
　　voice. “Yes, there’s something wrong. Something very, very wrong. 
　　Why do I have to come back to my office to findthis sitting on my 
　　desk?”

　　It was like trying to solve one of those twisted riddles. Why did 
　　she have to come back to her desk to find this sitting on it, I 
　　wondered. Clearly, the fact that she had requested it an hour 
　　earlier was not the correct answer, but it was the only one I had. 
　　Did she not like the tray it was on? No, that wasn’t possible: she’d 
　　seen it a million times and hadn’t ever complained about it. Had 
　　they accidentally given her the wrong cut of meat? No, that wasn’t 
　　it, either. The restaurant had once mistakenly sent me off with a 
　　wonderful-looking filet, thinking that she was sure to enjoy it more 
　　than the tough ribeye, but she’d almost had a full-fledged heart 
　　attack. She’d made me call the chef personally and scream at him 
　　over the phone while she stood over me and told me what to say.

　　“I’m so sorry, miss, really I am,” he’d said softly, sounding like 
　　the nicest guy in the world. “I really just thought that since Ms. 
　　Priestly is such a good customer that she’d prefer to have our best. 
　　I didn’t charge her extra, but don’t worry, it won’t happen again, I 
　　promise.” I felt like crying when she ordered me to tell him that he 
　　would never be a real chef anywhere besides some second-rate steak 
　　emporium, but I had done it. And he had apologized and agreed, and 
　　from that day on she’d always gotten her bloody ribeye. So it wasn’t 
　　that, either. I had no idea what to say or do.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah. Did Mr. Ravitz’s assistant not tell you that we had 
　　lunch together in that wretched dining room just a few moments ago?” 
　　she asked slowly, as though she were trying to keep herself from 
　　losing control completely.

　　Shewhat? After all of that, after all the running and the Sebastian 
　　ridiculousness, and the angry phone calls, and the 
　　ninety-five-dollar meal, and the Tiffany song, and the food 
　　arranging, and the dizziness, and the waiting to eat until she came 
　　back, andshe’d already eaten?

　　“Uh, no, we didn’t get a call from her at all. So, uh, does that 
　　mean you don’t want this?” I asked, motioning to the tray.

　　She looked at me as if I had just suggested she eat one of the 
　　twins. “What do you think that means, Emily?” Shit! She’d been doing 
　　so well with my name.

　　“I guess that, uh, well, that you don’t want it.”

　　“That’s very perceptive of you, Emily. I’m lucky you’re such a quick 
　　study. Now remove it. And make sure this does not happen again. 
　　That’s all.”

　　A quick fantasy flashed forward, one in which I would, just like in 
　　the movies, sweep my arm across the desk and send the whole tray 
　　flying across the room. She would watch and, shocked into 
　　contriteness, apologize profusely for speaking to me like that. But 
　　the clicking of her nails against the desk brought me back to 
　　reality, and I quickly picked up the tray and carefully walked out 
　　of her office.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, close the door! I need a moment!” she called. I guess 
　　that having a gourmet lunch appear on her desk that she didn’t feel 
　　like eating had been a really stressful part of her day.

　　Emily had just returned with a can of Diet Coke and a package of 
　　raisins for me. This was supposed to be the snack to tide me over to 
　　lunch, and of course there wasn’t a single calorie or gram of fat or 
　　ounce of added sugar in the whole thing. She dropped them on her 
　　desk when she heard Miranda calling and ran over to shut her French 
　　doors.

　　“What happened?” she whispered, eyeing the untouched tray of food 
　　that I was holding, frozen to the spot near my desk.

　　“Oh, it seems our charming boss already had her lunch,” I hissed 
　　through clenched teeth. “And she just reamed me out for not 
　　predicting, not divining, not being able to look directly inside her 
　　stomach and know that she wasn’t hungry anymore.”

　　“You’re kidding me,” she said. “She yelled at you because you ran to 
　　get her lunch―just like she asked―and then couldn’t possibly have 
　　known that she’d already eaten somewhere else? What a bitch!”

　　I nodded. It was a phenomenal change of pace to have Emily actually 
　　take my side for once, not to lecture me on all the ways I Just 
　　Don’t Get It. But, wait! It was too good to be true. Like a sun that 
　　falls out of the sky, leaving only pink and blue streaks where it 
　　had shone seconds before, Emily’s face flashed from angry to 
　　contrite. TheRunway Paranoid Turnaround.

　　“Remember what we talked about before, Andrea.” Oh, yes, here it 
　　comes. RPT, twelve o’clock. “She doesn’t do it to hurt you. She 
　　doesn’t mean anything by it. She’s just way too important to get 
　　held up on the little stuff. So don’t fight it. Just throw out the 
　　food, and let’s move on.” Emily fixed her features in a determined 
　　look and took a seat in front of her computer. I knew she was 
　　wondering right then and there if Miranda had had our outer office 
　　areas bugged and had heard the whole thing. She was red and 
　　flustered and very obviously displeased with her lack of control. I 
　　didn’t know how she had survived as long as she had.

　　I thought about eating the steak myself, but the mere thought that 
　　it had been on Miranda’s desk only moments earlier made me feel 
　　nauseated. I took the tray to the kitchen and tilted it so every 
　　single item would just slide directly into the garbage―all the 
　　expertly cooked and seasoned food, the china plate, the metal butter 
　　container, the salt box, the linen napkin, the silver, the steak 
　　knife, and the Baccarat glass. Gone. All gone. What did it matter? 
　　I’d get it all over again the next day, or whenever it was that she 
　　may again be hungry for lunch.

　　By the time I’d made it to Drinkland, Alex looked annoyed and Lily 
　　looked wasted. I immediately wondered if Alex somehow knew that I’d 
　　been asked out on a date today, by a guy who was not only famous and 
　　older, but also a complete and total dickhead. Could he tell? Did he 
　　sense it? Should I tell him? No, no need to get into it with him 
　　when it was so insignificant. It wasn’t like I was admitting to 
　　being interested in some other guy, not like I would actually ever 
　　act on it. So there was nothing to gain by mentioning the 
　　conversation at all.

　　“Hey there, fashion girl,” Lily slurred, waving her gin and tonic 
　　toward me in a salute. Some of it splashed down the front of her 
　　cardigan, but she didn’t seem to notice. “Or should I say, future 
　　roomie? Get a drink. We need to have a toast!” It came out sounding 
　　like “toath.”

　　I kissed Alex and sat down next to him.

　　“Don’t you look hot today!” he said, eyeing my Prada outfit 
　　appreciatively. “When did this happen?”

　　“Oh, today. Right around the time it was all but spelled out that if 
　　I didn’t fix my look I might not have a job anymore. Pretty 
　　insulting stuff, but I have to say, if you’ve got to put something 
　　on every day, this stuff isn’t half bad.

　　“Hey, listen, guys. I’m really, really sorry I’m late. The Book took 
　　forever tonight, and as soon as I dropped it off at Miranda’s she 
　　had me run to the corner deli and pick up some basil.”

　　“I thought you said she had a cook,” Alex pointed out. “Why couldn’t 
　　he do it?”

　　“She does indeed have a cook. She also has a housekeeper, a nanny, 
　　and two children. So I have no idea why I was the one sent out for 
　　dinner spices. It was especially annoying since Fifth Avenue doesn’t 
　　have any corner delis, and neither does Madison or Park, so I had to 
　　go all the way to Lex to find one. But, of course, they didn’t sell 
　　basil, so I had to walk up nine blocks until I found an open 
　　D’Agostino’s. It took me an extra forty-five minutes. I should just 
　　expense a fucking spice rack and start traveling with it wherever I 
　　go. But let me tell you, those were a really, really worthwhile 
　　forty-five minutes! I mean, think of how much I learned shopping for 
　　that basil, how better prepared I am for my future in magazines! I’m 
　　on the fast track to becoming an editor now!” I flashed a winning 
　　smile.

　　“To your future!” Lily cried, not detecting a single hint of sarcasm 
　　in my diatribe.

　　“She’s so far gone,” Alex said quietly, watching Lily with the look 
　　of someone watching a sick relative sleep in a hospital bed. “I got 
　　here on time with Max, who already left, but she must’ve been here 
　　for hours already. Either that, or she drinks really fast.”

　　Lily had always been a big drinker, but it wasn’t weird, because 
　　Lily was a big everything. She was the first one to smoke pot in 
　　junior high and the first one to lose her virginity in high school 
　　and the first to go skydiving in college. She loved anyone and 
　　anything that didn’t love her back, so long as it made herfeel 
　　alive.

　　“I just don’t understand how you can sleep with him when you know 
　　he’s never going to break up with his girlfriend,” I’d said about a 
　　guy she’d been secretly seeing our junior year.

　　“I just don’t understand how you can play by so many rules,” she’d 
　　shot back instantly. “Where’s the fun in all your perfectly planned, 
　　mapped-out, rule-filled life? Live a little, Andy! Feel something! 
　　It’s good to be alive!”

　　Maybe she had been drinking a little more lately, but I knew that 
　　her first-year studies were incredibly stressful, even for her, and 
　　that her professors at Columbia were more demanding and less 
　　understanding than the ones she’d had wrapped around her finger at 
　　Brown.It might not be a bad idea, I thought, signaling to the 
　　waitress. Maybe drinking was the way to handle it. I ordered an 
　　Absolut and grapefruit juice and took a long, deep swig. It made me 
　　feel more sick than anything, because I still hadn’t had time to eat 
　　anything except the raisins and the Diet Coke Emily had scraped 
　　together for me earlier that day.

　　“I’m sure she’s just had a rough couple of weeks in school,” I said 
　　to Alex as though Lily weren’t sitting with us. She didn’t notice we 
　　were talking about her because she was preoccupied giving some 
　　yuppie guy at the bar heavy-lidded, come-hither looks. Alex put his 
　　arm around me and I snuggled closer on the couch. It felt so good to 
　　be near him again―it seemed like it had been weeks.

　　“I hate to be a buzz-kill, but I really have to get Home,” Alex 
　　said, pushing my hair back behind my ear. “Will you be OK with her?”

　　“You have to leave? Already?”

　　“Already? Andy, I’ve been here watching your best friend drink for 
　　the past two hours. I came to see you, but you weren’t here. And now 
　　it’s almost midnight, and I still have essays to correct.” He said 
　　it calmly, but I could see that he was upset.

　　“I know, I’m sorry about that, I really am. You know that I would’ve 
　　been there if I could’ve helped it at all. You know that―”

　　“I do know all that. I’m not saying you did anything wrong or that 
　　you could’ve done anything differently. I understand. But try to 
　　understand where I’m coming from, too, OK?”

　　I nodded and kissed him, but I felt awful. I pledged to make it up 
　　to him, to pick a night and plan something really special for just 
　　the two of us. He did, after all, put up with a lot from me.

　　“So, you won’t even stay over tonight?” I asked hopefully.

　　“Not unless you need help with Lily. I really need to get Home and 
　　work on those papers.” He hugged me good-bye, kissed Lily on the 
　　cheek, and headed toward the door. “Call me if you need me,” he said 
　　as he walked out.

　　“Hey, why’d Alex leave?” Lily asked, even though she’d been sitting 
　　there through the entire conversation. “Is he mad at you?”

　　“Probably,” I sighed, hugging my canvas messenger bag to my chest. 
　　“I’ve been a shit to him lately.” I went to the bar to ask for an 
　　appetizer menu and by the time I came back, the Wall Street guy had 
　　curled up on the couch next to Lily. He looked to be in his late 
　　twenties, but his receding hairline made it impossible to know for 
　　sure.

　　I grabbed her coat and tossed it at her. “Lily, put that on. We’re 
　　leaving,” I said while looking at him. He was on the shorter side, 
　　and his pleated khakis didn’t help his pudgy figure. And the fact 
　　that his tongue was now two inches from my best friend’s ear didn’t 
　　make me like him any more.

　　“Hey, what’s the rush?” he asked in a whiny, nasal voice. “Your 
　　friend and I are just getting to know each other.” Lily grinned and 
　　nodded, trying to take a gulp from her drink but not realizing her 
　　glass was empty.

　　“Well, that’s very sweet, but it’s time for us to go. What’s your 
　　name?”

　　“Stuart.”

　　“Nice to meet you, Stuart. Why don’t you give Lily here your number 
　　and she can give you a call when she’s feeling a little better―or 
　　not. How does that sound?” I flashed him a smile.

　　“Uh, whatever. No worries. I’ll catch you guys later.” He was on his 
　　feet and headed to the bar so fast that Lily hadn’t yet noticed he’d 
　　left.

　　“Stuart and I are getting to know each other, aren’t we, Stu?” She 
　　turned to the place where he had sat and looked confused.

　　“Stuart had to run, Lil. Come on, let’s get out of here.”

　　I pulled her drab green peacoat on over her sweater and yanked her 
　　to her feet, where she swayed precariously until she regained her 
　　balance. The air outside was searing and cold and I figured it’d 
　　help her sober up.

　　“I don’t feel so good.” She was slurring again.

　　“I know, sweetie, I know. Let’s get a cab back to your apartment, 
　　OK? Do you think you can make it?”

　　She nodded and then leaned over very casually and threw up. All over 
　　her brown boots, with some of it splashing up the sides of her 
　　jeans.If only the Runwaygirls could see my best friend now. I 
　　couldn’t help thinking.

　　I sat her down on a window ledge that looked reasonably like it 
　　wouldn’t have an alarm and ordered her not to move. There was a 
　　twenty-four-hour bodega right across the street, and this girl 
　　clearly needed some water. When I got back, she’d thrown up 
　　again―this time all down her front―and her eyes looked droopy. I’d 
　　bought two bottles of Poland Spring, one for her to drink and one 
　　for cleaning, but she was too gross now. I dumped one all over her 
　　feet to wash away the sick, and half of the second one over her 
　　coat. Better to be soaking wet than covered in puke. She was so 
　　drunk she didn’t even notice.

　　It took a little persuading to get a cabbie to let us in with Lily 
　　looking in such bad shape, but I promised a really big tip on top of 
　　what was sure to be a really big fare. We were going from the Lower 
　　East Side to the far Upper West, and I was already figuring out a 
　　way to expense what was sure to be a twenty-dollar ride. I could 
　　probably just write it off as a trip I had to make in search of 
　　something for Miranda. Yes, that would work.

　　The trip to her fourth-floor walk-up was even less fun than the cab, 
　　but she’d become more cooperative after the twenty-five-minute ride, 
　　and she even managed to wash herself in the shower after I’d 
　　undressed her. I pointed her in the direction of her bed and watched 
　　as she collapsed face-down when her knees hit the box spring. I 
　　looked down at her, unconscious, and was momentarily nostalgic for 
　　college, for all the things we’d done together then. It was fun now, 
　　no question, but it would never again be as carefree as then.

　　I briefly wondered if Lily might be drinking too much these days. 
　　After all, she did seem to be drunk pretty consistently. But when 
　　Alex had brought it up the week before, I’d assured him it was 
　　because she was still a student, still not living in the real world 
　　with real, adult responsibilities (like pouring the perfect 
　　Pellegrino!). I mean, it’s not like we hadn’t together done too many 
　　shots at Se&ntilde;or Frog’s on spring break or too ambitiously worked our 
　　way through three bottles of red wine while celebrating the 
　　anniversary of the day we’d first met in eighth grade. Lily had held 
　　my hair back as I sat with my face resting on the toilet seat after 
　　a postfinals binge, and pulled over four times once while driving me 
　　back to my dorm after a night that had included eight rum and Cokes 
　　and a particularly horrid karaoke rendition of “Every Rose Has Its 
　　Thorn.” I’d dragged her back to my apartment on the night of her 
　　twenty-first birthday and tucked her into my bed, checking her 
　　breathing every ten minutes, and finally fell asleep on the floor 
　　next to her after I’d made sure she’d live through the night. She 
　　had awakened twice that night. The first time was to throw up over 
　　the side of the bed―making a sincere effort to make it into the 
　　garbage can I’d set up beside it but getting confused and vomiting 
　　down the side of my wall instead―and once more to apologize 
　　sincerely and tell me she loved me and I was the best friend a girl 
　　could have. That’s what friends did: they got drunk together and did 
　　stupid things and looked out for one another, right? Or was that all 
　　just college fun, rites of passage that had a time and a place? Alex 
　　had insisted that this was different, thatshe was different, but I 
　　just didn’t see it that way.

　　I knew I should’ve stayed with her tonight, but it was nearly two 
　　and I had to be at work in five hours. My clothes smelled of vomit 
　　and there was no way I could find a single appropriate piece of 
　　clothing in Lily’s closet to wear toRunway ―especially with my new 
　　upgraded look. I sighed and pulled a blanket over her and set her 
　　alarm for 7:00A .M. so just in case she wasn’t too hungover, she’d 
　　have a shot at making it to class.

　　“’Bye, Lil. I’m heading out. You OK?” I placed the portable phone on 
　　the pillow by her head.

　　She opened her eyes, looked directly at me, and smiled. “Thanks,” 
　　she muttered, her eyelids dropping again. She wasn’t fit to run a 
　　marathon, or probably even operate a motorized lawn mower, but she’d 
　　be fine to just sleep it off.

　　“It was my pleasure,” I managed, even though this was the first time 
　　in twenty-one hours I had stopped physically running, fetching, 
　　rearranging, moving, cleaning, or otherwise assisting. “I’ll call 
　　you tomorrow,” I said as I willed my legs not to give out. “If 
　　either of us is still alive.” And I finally,finally, went Home.


　　10

　　“Hey, I’m glad I caught you,” I heard Cara say on the other end of 
　　the line. Why was she out of breath at quarter of eight in the 
　　morning?

　　“Uh-oh. You never call this early. What’s wrong?” In the split 
　　second it took me to say those words, a half-dozen scenarios of what 
　　Miranda could need raced through my mind.

　　“No, no, it’s nothing like that. I just wanted to warn you that 
　　B-DAD is on his way in to see you, and he’s particularly chatty this 
　　morning.”

　　“Oh, well, that’s sure great news. It’s been, what, nearly a week 
　　since he’s interrogated me about every aspect of my life? I was 
　　wondering where my biggest fan had gone.” I finished typing my memo 
　　and hit “print.”

　　“You’re a lucky girl, I have to say. He’s lost interest in me 
　　entirely,” she pined dramatically. “He only has eyes for you. I 
　　heard him say that he was coming over to discuss details of the Met 
　　party with you.”

　　“Great, that’s just great. I can’t wait to meet this brother of his. 
　　So far I’ve just spoken to him on the phone, but he sounds like a 
　　total schmuck. So, you’re sure he’s on his way, or is it possible 
　　there’s a kind spirit up above who just may spare me that particular 
　　misery today?”

　　“Nope, not today. He’s definitely on his way. Miranda has a 
　　podiatrist appointment at eight-thirtyA .M., so I don’t think she’ll 
　　be coming with him.”

　　I checked the appointment book on Emily’s desk quickly and confirmed 
　　her appointments. A Miranda-free morning was indeed on the schedule. 
　　“Fantastic. I couldn’t think of anyone dreamier to do a little 
　　early-morning bonding with than B-DAD himself. Why does he talk so 
　　much?”

　　“Can’t answer that other than to point out the obvious: he married 
　　her, so he’s clearly not all there. Call if he says anything 
　　particularly ridiculous. I have to run. Caroline just smashed one of 
　　Miranda’s Stila lipsticks into the bathroom mirror for no apparent 
　　reason.”

　　“Our lives rock, don’t they? We’re the coolest girls. Anyway, thanks 
　　for the heads up. Talk to you later.”

　　“OK, ’bye.”

　　I glanced over the memo while I waited for B-DAD’s arrival. It was a 
　　request to the board of trustees of the Metropolitan Museum of Art 
　　from Miranda. She was asking permission to throw a dinner party in 
　　one of the galleries in March for her brother-in-law, a man I could 
　　tell she absolutely despised but who was, unfortunately, family. 
　　Jack Tomlinson was B-DAD’s younger and wilder brother, and he’d just 
　　announced he was leaving his wife and three children and marrying 
　　his masseuse. Although he and B-DAD were both quintessential East 
　　Coast prep school aristocracy, Jack had shed his Harvard persona in 
　　his late twenties and moved to South Carolina, where he’d 
　　immediately made a fortune in real estate. Judging from everything 
　　Emily had told me, he’d morphed into a first-class Southern boy, a 
　　real straw-chewin’, tobacco-spittin’ hick, which of course appalled 
　　Miranda, the epitome of class and sophistication. B-DAD had asked 
　　Miranda to organize an engagement party for his baby brother, and 
　　Miranda, blinded by love, had no choice but to oblige. And if she 
　　had to do something, then she sure as hell was going to do it right. 
　　And right was at the Met.

　　Dear Honored Members, blah, blah, blah, would like to request 
　　permission to host a fabulous little soiree, blah, blah, blah, will 
　　be hiring only the finest caterers, florists, and band, of course, 
　　blah, blah, blah, would welcome your input, blah, blah. Making sure 
　　one last time that there were no glaring errors, I quickly forged 
　　her name and called for a messenger to come pick it up.

　　The knock on the office suite door―which I kept closed this early in 
　　the morning since no one was in yet anyway―came almost immediately, 
　　and I was impressed with their turnaround time, but the door swung 
　　open to reveal B-DAD, who was sporting a grin much too enthusiastic 
　　for pre-eightA.M .

　　“Andrea,” he sang, immediately walking over to my desk and smiling 
　　so genuinely it made me feel guilty for not liking him.

　　“Good morning, Mr. Tomlinson. What brings you here so early?” I 
　　asked. “I’m sorry to tell you that Miranda’s not in yet.”

　　He chuckled, his nose twitching like a rodent’s. “Yes, yes, she 
　　won’t be in until after lunch, or so I believe. Andy, it really has 
　　been too long since you and I caught up. Tell Mr. T. now: How is 
　　everything?”

　　“Here, let me take those,” I said, pulling the monogrammed duffel 
　　full of Miranda’s dirty clothes that she’d given him to give to me. 
　　I also relieved him of the beaded Fendi tote bag that had surfaced 
　　again recently. It was a one-of-a-kind tote that had been 
　　hand-beaded in an elaborate crystal design just for Miranda from 
　　Silvia Venturini Fendi, as a thank-you for all of her support, and 
　　one of the fashion assistants had put its value at just under ten 
　　grand. But I noticed today that one of the skinny leather handles 
　　had broken loose yet again, even though the accessories department 
　　had returned it to Fendi for hand-stitching two dozen times already. 
　　It was intended to hold a delicate ladies’ wallet, perhaps 
　　accompanied by a pair of sunglasses or maybe, if absolutely 
　　necessary, a small Cell Phone. Miranda didn’t really care about 
　　that. She had currently crammed in an extra-large bottle of Bulgari 
　　perfume, a sandal with a broken heel that I was probably supposed to 
　　get fixed, the blotter-size Hermès daily planner that weighed more 
　　than an entire laptop, an oversize spiked dog collar that I thought 
　　either belonged to Madelaine or was for an upcoming fashion shoot, 
　　and the Book I had delivered to her the night before. I would have 
　　hocked a bag worth ten thousand dollars and paid my rent for a year, 
　　but Miranda preferred to use it as a trash receptacle.

　　“Thank you, Andy. You really are a big help to everyone. So Mr. T. 
　　would sure like to hear more about your life. What’s going on?”

　　What’s going on?What’s going on?Hmm, well, let’s see here. Really 
　　not all that much, I suppose. I spend most of my time trying to 
　　survive my term of indentured servitude with your sadistic wife. If 
　　there are ever any free minutes during the workday when she’s not 
　　making some belittling demand, then I’m trying to block out the 
　　brainwash drivel that’s spoon-fed to me by her assistant in chief. 
　　On the increasingly rare occasions that I find myself outside the 
　　confines of this magazine, I’m usually trying to convince myself 
　　that it really is OK to eat more than eight hundred calories a day 
　　and that being a size six does not put me in the plus-size category. 
　　So I guess the short answer is, not much.

　　“Well, Mr. Tomlinson, not too much. I work a lot. And I guess when 
　　I’m not working I hang out with my best friend, or my boyfriend. Try 
　　to see my family.”I used to read a lot, I wanted to say,but I’m too 
　　tired now. And sports have always been a pretty big part of my life, 
　　but there wasn’t time anymore.

　　“So, you’re twenty-five, right?” He non-sequitured. I couldn’t even 
　　imagine where he was going with this one.

　　“Uh, no, I’m twenty-three. I only graduated last May.”

　　“Ah-hah! Twenty-three, huh?” He looked like he was trying to decide 
　　whether to say something or not. I braced myself. “So tell Mr. T., 
　　what do twenty-three-year-olds do in this city for fun? Restaurants? 
　　Clubs? That sort of thing?” He smiled again, and I wondered if he 
　　really needed the attention as much as he appeared to: there was 
　　nothing sinister behind his interest, just a seemingly driving need 
　　totalk .

　　“Um, well, all sorts of things, I guess. I don’t really go to clubs, 
　　but bars and lounges and places like that. Go out for dinner, see 
　　movies.”

　　“Well, that sounds like a lot of fun. Used to do that kind of stuff, 
　　too, when I was your age. Now it’s just a lot of work events and 
　　fund-raisers. Enjoy it while you can, Andy.” He winked like a dorky 
　　father would.

　　“Yeah, well, I’m trying,” I managed.Please leave, please leave, 
　　please leave, I willed, staring longingly at the bagel that was just 
　　calling my name. I get three minutes of peace and quiet a day, and 
　　this man was stealing all of it.

　　He opened his mouth to say something, but the doors swung open and 
　　Emily stomped in. She was wearing her headphones and moving to the 
　　music. I watched her mouth drop open when she saw him standing 
　　there.

　　“Mr. Tomlinson!” she exclaimed, yanking off her headphones and 
　　tossing her iPod in her Gucci tote. “Is everything OK? Nothing’s 
　　wrong with Miranda, is it?” She looked and sounded genuinely 
　　concerned. An A-plus performance: always the perfectly attentive, 
　　unfailingly polite assistant.

　　“Hello there, Emily. Nothing wrong at all. Miranda will be here 
　　shortly. Mr. T. just came by to drop off her things. How are you 
　　doing today?”

　　Emily beamed. I wondered if she actually enjoyed his presence. “Just 
　　fine. Thanks so much for asking. And you? Did Andrea help you with 
　　everything?”

　　“Oh, she sure did,” he said, throwing smile number 6,000 in my 
　　direction. “I wanted to go over a few things about my brother’s 
　　engagement party, but I realize that it’s probably a little early 
　　for that, right?”

　　For a moment I thought he meant too early in the morning and I 
　　almost shouted “Yes!” but then I realized that he meant it was too 
　　early in the planning to discuss details.

　　He turned back to Emily and said, “You’ve got yourself a great 
　　junior assistant here, don’t you think?”

　　“Absolutely,” Emily managed through clenched teeth. “She’s the 
　　best.” She grinned.

　　I grinned.

　　Mr. Tomlinson grinned with extra wattage, and I wondered if he had a 
　　chemical imbalance, perhaps hypomania.

　　“Well, Mr. T. had better be on his way. It’s always lovely chatting 
　　with you girls. Have a nice morning, both of you. Good-bye now.”

　　“’Bye, Mr. Tomlinson!” Emily called as he rounded the corner in the 
　　hallway on his way to reception.

　　“Why were you so rude to him?” she asked as she pulled the flimsy 
　　leather blazer off, only to reveal a flimsier chiffon scoop-neck 
　　that was laced all the way up the front like a corset.

　　“So rude? I helped him unload her stuff and I talked to him before 
　　you got here. How is that rude?”

　　“Well, you didn’t say good-bye, for one thing. And you have that 
　　look on your face.”

　　“That look?”

　　“Yes, that look of yours. The one that tells everyone just how far 
　　above this you are, just how much you hate it here. That may fly 
　　with me, but it won’t with Mr. Tomlinson. He’s Miranda’shusband , 
　　and you just can’t treat him like that.”

　　“Em, don’t you think he’s a little, I don’t know . . . weird? He 
　　never stops talking. How can he be so nice when she’s such a . . . 
　　so not as nice?” I watched as she glanced inside Miranda’s office to 
　　make sure that I’d set the newspapers correctly.

　　“Weird? Hardly, Andrea. He’s one of the most prominent tax attorneys 
　　in Manhattan.”

　　It wasn’t worth it. “Never mind, I don’t even know what I’m saying. 
　　What’s going on with you? How was your night?”

　　“Oh, it was good. I went shopping with Jessica for gifts for her 
　　bridesmaids. Everywhere―Scoop, Bergdorf’s, Infinity, everywhere. And 
　　I tried on a bunch of stuff to get some idea for Paris, but it’s 
　　still really too early.”

　　“For Paris? You’re going to Paris? Does that mean you’ll leave me 
　　alone with her?” I hadn’t meant to say the last part out loud, but 
　　it had slipped.

　　Again, a look like I was crazy. “Yes, I’ll be going to Paris with 
　　Miranda in October, for the spring ready-to-wear shows. Each year 
　　she takes her senior assistant to the spring shows so she can see 
　　what it’s really like. I mean, I’ve been to, like, a million at 
　　Bryant Park, but the European shows are just different.”

　　I did a quick calculation. “In October, as in seven months from now? 
　　You were trying on clothes for a trip seven months from now?” I 
　　hadn’t meant for it to sound as harsh as it did, and Emily 
　　immediately got defensive.

　　“Well, yes. I mean, obviously I wasn’t going to buy anything―so many 
　　of the styles will have changed by then. But I just wanted to start 
　　thinking about it. It’s a really huge deal, you know. Stay in 
　　five-star hotels, go to the craziest parties ever. And my god, you 
　　get to go to the hottest, most exclusive fashion shows in 
　　existence.”

　　Emily had already told me that Miranda went to Europe three or four 
　　times a year for the fashion shows. She always skipped London, like 
　　everyone did, but she went to Milan and Paris in October for spring 
　　ready-to-wear, in July for winter couture, and in March for fall 
　　ready-to-wear. Sometimes she’d hit resort, but not always. We’d been 
　　working like crazy to get Miranda prepared for the shows coming up 
　　at the end of the month. I’d wondered briefly why she wasn’t 
　　planning on bringing an assistant.

　　“So why doesn’t she take you to all of them?” I decided to just go 
　　for it, even though the answer was sure to entail a lengthy 
　　explanation. I was excited enough that Miranda would be out of the 
　　office for two whole weeks (she spent one in Milan and one in Paris) 
　　and was giddy at the thought of getting rid of Emily for a week of 
　　that. Visions of bacon cheeseburgers and nonprofessionally ripped 
　　jeans and flats―oh hell, maybe even sneakers―filled my head. “Why 
　　just in October?”

　　“Well, it’s not like she doesn’t have help over there. Italian and 
　　FrenchRunway always send some of their assistants for Miranda, and 
　　most of the time the editors help her themselves. But it’s at spring 
　　RTW that she throws a huge party, the annual kick-off party that 
　　everyone says is the biggest and best at all the shows, all year 
　　long. I’ll only go for the week while she’s in Paris. So obviously 
　　she would only trustme to help her there.” Obviously.

　　“Mmm, sounds like it’ll be a great time. So that means I just hold 
　　down the fort here, huh?”

　　“Yeah, pretty much. But don’t think that it’ll be a joke. That will 
　　probably be the hardest week of all because she needs a lot of 
　　assistance when she’s away. She’ll be calling you a lot.”

　　“Oh, goody,” I said. She rolled her eyes.

　　I slept with my eyes open, staring at a blank computer screen, until 
　　the office began to fill up and there were other people to watch. 
　　TenA .M. brought the first of the Clackers, the quiet sipping of 
　　no-whip skim lattes to nurse the previous night’s champagne 
　　hangovers. James stopped by my desk, as he did whenever he saw 
　　Miranda wasn’t at hers, and proclaimed he’d met his future husband 
　　at Balthazar the night before.

　　“He was just sitting at the bar, wearing the greatest red leather 
　　jacket I’d ever seen―and let me tell you, he could pull it off. You 
　　should have seen how he slipped those oysters on his tongue . . .” 
　　He audibly groaned. “Oh, it was just magnificent.”

　　“So’d you get his number?” I asked.

　　“Get his number? Try get his pants. He was butt-ass naked on my 
　　couch by eleven, and boy, let me tell you―”

　　“Lovely, James. Lovely. Not one for playing hard to get, are you? 
　　Sounds a little slutty of you, to be honest. This is the age of 
　　AIDS, you know.”

　　“Sweetie, even you, Miss High and Mighty 
　　I-Date-the-World’s-Last-Angel, would’ve been on your knees without a 
　　second thought if you saw this guy. He’s absolutely amazing. 
　　Amazing!”

　　By eleven everyone had checked everyone else out, making notations 
　　of who had scored a pair of the new Theory “Max” pants or the 
　　latest, impossible-to-find Sevens. Time for a break at noon, when 
　　conversation centered around particular items of clothing and 
　　usually took place by the racks lined up against the walls. Each 
　　morning Jeffy would pull out all the racks of dresses and bathing 
　　suits and pants and shirts and coats and shoes and everything else 
　　that had been called in as a potential item to shoot for one of the 
　　fashion spreads. He lined up each rack against a wall, weaving them 
　　throughout the entire floor so the editors could find what they 
　　needed without having to fight their way through the Closet itself.

　　The Closet wasn’t really a closet at all. It was more like a small 
　　auditorium. Along the perimeter were walls of shoes in every size 
　　and color and style, a virtual Willy Wonka’s factory for 
　　fashionistas, with dozens of slingbacks, stilettos, ballet flats, 
　　high-heeled boots, open-toe sandals, beaded heels. Stacked drawers, 
　　some built-in and others just shoved in corners, held every 
　　imaginable configuration of stockings, socks, bras, panties, slips, 
　　camisoles, and corsets. Need a last-minute leopard-print push-up bra 
　　from La Perla? Check the Closet. How about a pair of flesh-colored 
　　fishnets or those Dior aviators? In the Closet. The accessories 
　　shelves and drawers took up the farthest two walls, and the sheer 
　　amount of merchandise―not to mention its value―was staggering. 
　　Fountain pens. Jewelry. Bed linens. Mufflers and gloves and ski 
　　caps. Pajamas. Capes. Shawls. Stationery. Silk flowers. Hats, so 
　　many hats. And bags. The bags! There were totes and bowling bags, 
　　backpacks and under-arms, over-shoulders and minis, oversize and 
　　clutches, envelopes and messengers, each bearing an exclusive label 
　　and a price tag of more than the average American’s monthly mortgage 
　　payment. And then there were the racks and racks of clothes―pushed 
　　so tightly together it was impossible to walk among them―that 
　　occupied every remaining inch of space.

　　So during the day Jeffy would attempt to make the Closet a 
　　semi-usable space where models (and assistants like myself) could 
　　try on clothes and actually reach some of the shoes and bags in the 
　　back by pushing all of the racks into the halls. I’d yet to see a 
　　single visitor to the floor―whether writer or boyfriend or messenger 
　　or stylist―not stop dead in his or her tracks and gape at the 
　　couture-lined hallways. Sometimes the racks were arranged by shoot 
　　(Sydney, Santa Barbara) and other times by item (bikinis, skirt 
　　suits), but mostly it just seemed like a haplessly casual mishmash 
　　ofreally expensive stuff . And although everyone stopped and stared 
　　and fingered the butter-soft cashmeres and the intricately beaded 
　　evening gowns, it was the Clackers who hovered possessively over 
　　“their” clothes and provided constant, streaming commentary on each 
　　and every piece.

　　“Maggie Rizer is the only woman in theworld who can actually wear 
　　these capris,” Hope, one of the fashion assistants―weighing a 
　　whopping 105 pounds and clocking in at six-one―loudly announced 
　　outside our office suite while holding the pants in front of her 
　　legs and sighing. “They would make my ass look even more gigantic 
　　than it already is.”

　　“Andrea,” called her friend, a girl I didn’t know very well who 
　　worked in accessories, “please tell Hope she’s not fat.”

　　“You’re not fat,” I said, my mouth on autopilot. It would’ve saved 
　　me many, many hours to have a shirt printed up that said as much, or 
　　perhaps to just have the phrase tattooed directly on my forehead. I 
　　was constantly called on to assure variousRunway employees that they 
　　weren’t fat.

　　“Ohmigod, have you seen my gut lately? I’m like the fucking 
　　Firestone store, spare tires everywhere. I’m huge!” Fat was on 
　　everyone’s minds, if not actually their bodies. Emily swore that her 
　　thighs had a “wider circumference than a giant sequoia.” Jessica 
　　believed that her “jiggly upper arms” looked like Roseanne Barr’s. 
　　Even James complained that his ass had looked so big that morning 
　　when he got out of the shower that he’d “contemplated calling in fat 
　　to work.”

　　In the beginning I’d responded to the myriad am-I-fat questions with 
　　what I thought to be an exceedingly rational reply. “If you’re fat, 
　　Hope, what does that make me? I’m two inches shorter than you and I 
　　weigh more.”

　　“Oh, Andy, be serious.I am fat.You’re thin and gorgeous!”

　　Naturally I thought she was lying, but I soon came to realize that 
　　Hope―along with every other anorexically skinny girl in the office, 
　　and most of the guys―was able to accurately evaluate other people’s 
　　weight. It was just when it came time to look in the mirror that 
　　everyone genuinely saw a wildebeest staring back.

　　Of course, as much as I tried to keep it at bay, to remind myself 
　　over and over that I was normal and they weren’t, the constant fat 
　　comments had made an impression. It’d only been four months I’d been 
　　working, but my mind was now skewed enough―not to mention 
　　paranoid―that I sometimes thought these comments were directed 
　　intentionally to me. As in: I, the tall, gorgeous, svelte fashion 
　　assistant, am pretending to think I’m fat just so you, the lumpy, 
　　stumpy personal assistant will realize that you are indeed the fat 
　　one. At five-ten and 115 pounds (the same weight as when my body was 
　　racked with parasites), I’d always considered myself on the thinner 
　　side of girls my age. I’d also spent my life until then feeling 
　　taller than ninety percent of the women I met, and at least half the 
　　guys. Not until starting work at this delusional place did I know 
　　what it was like to feel short and fat, all day, every day. I was 
　　easily the troll of the group, the squattest and the widest, and I 
　　wore a size six. And just in case I failed to consider this for a 
　　moment, the daily chitchat and gossip could surely remind me.

　　“Dr. Eisenberg said that the Zone only works if you swear off fruit, 
　　too, you know,” Jessica added, joining the conversation by plucking 
　　a skirt from the Narcisco Rodriguez rack. Newly engaged to one of 
　　the youngest vice presidents at Goldman Sachs, Jessica was feeling 
　　the pressures of her upcoming society wedding. “And she’s right. 
　　I’ve lost at least another ten pounds since my last fitting.” I 
　　forgave her for starving herself when she barely had enough body fat 
　　to function normally, but I just couldn’t forgive her fortalking 
　　about it. I could not, no matter how impressive the doctors’ names 
　　were or how many success stories she prattled on about, bring myself 
　　tocare .

　　At around one the office really picked up pace, because everyone 
　　began getting ready for lunch. Not that there was any eating 
　　associated with the lunch hour, but it was the prime time of day for 
　　guests. I watched lazily as the usual array of stylists, 
　　contributors, freelancers, friends, and lovers stopped by to revel 
　　in and generally soak up the glamour that naturally accompanied 
　　hundreds of thousands of dollars’ worth of clothes, dozens of 
　　gorgeous faces, and what felt like an unlimited amount of really, 
　　really, really long legs.

　　Jeffy made his way over to me as soon as he could confirm that both 
　　Miranda and Emily had left for lunch and handed me two enormous 
　　shopping bags.

　　“Here, check this stuff out. This should be a pretty good start.”

　　I dumped the contents of one bag onto the floor beside my desk and 
　　began sorting. There were Joseph pants in camel and charcoal gray, 
　　both long and lean and low-waisted, made from an incredibly soft 
　　wool. A pair of brown suede Gucci pants looked as though they could 
　　turn any schlub into a supermodel, while two pairs of perfectly 
　　faded Marc Jacobs jeans looked like they were custom cut for my 
　　body. There were eight or nine options for tops, ranging from a 
　　skintight ribbed turtleneck sweater by Calvin Klein to a teeny, 
　　completely sheer peasant blouse by Donna Karan. A dynamite graphic 
　　Diane Von Furstenburg wrap-dress was folded neatly over a navy, 
　　velvet Tahari pantsuit. I spotted and immediately fell in love with 
　　an all-around pleated Habitual denim skirt that would fall just 
　　above my knees and look perfect with the decidedly funky 
　　floral-printed Katayone Adelie blazer.

　　“These clothes . . . this is all for me?” I asked, hoping I sounded 
　　excited and not offended.

　　“Yeah, it’s nothing. Just some things that have been lying around 
　　the Closet forever. We might have used some of it in shoots, but 
　　none of it ever got returned to the companies. Every few months or 
　　so I clean out the Closet and give this stuff away, and I figured 
　　you, uh, might be interested. You’re a size six, right?”

　　I nodded, still dumbfounded.

　　“Yeah, I could tell. Most everyone else is a two or smaller, so 
　　you’re welcome to all of it.”

　　Ouch. “Great. This is just great. Jeffy, I can’t thank you enough. 
　　It’s all amazing!”

　　“Check out the second bag,” he said, motioning to where it sat on 
　　the floor. “You don’t think you can pull off that velvet suit with 
　　that shitty messenger bag you’re always dragging around, do you?”

　　The second, even more bulging bag spilled forth a stunning array of 
　　shoes, bags, and a couple of coats. There were two pairs of 
　　high-heeled Jimmy Choo boots―one ankle- and one knee-length―two 
　　pairs of open-toe Manolo stiletto sandals, a pair of classic black 
　　Prada pumps, and one pair of Tod loafers, which Jeffy immediately 
　　reminded me to never wear to the office. I slung a slouchy red suede 
　　bag over my shoulder and immediately saw the two intersecting “C”s 
　　carved in the front, but that wasn’t nearly as beautiful as the deep 
　　chocolate leather from the Celine tote that I threw on my other arm. 
　　A long military-style trench with the signature oversize Marc Jacobs 
　　buttons topped it all off.

　　“You’re joking,” I said softly, fondling a pair of Dior sunglasses 
　　he’d apparently thrown in as an afterthought. “You’ve got to be 
　　kidding.”

　　He looked pleased with my reaction and ducked his head. “Just do me 
　　a favor and wear it, OK? And don’t tell anyone that I gave you first 
　　pick on all this stuff, because they live for the Closet clean-outs, 
　　you hear?” He bolted from the suite when we heard Emily’s voice call 
　　out to someone down the hall, and I shoved my new clothes under my 
　　desk.

　　Emily came back from the dining room with her usual lunch: an 
　　all-natural fruit smoothie and a small to-go container of iceberg 
　　lettuce topped with broccoli and balsamic vinegar. Not vinaigrette. 
　　Vinegar. Miranda would be in any minute―Uri had just called to say 
　　he was dropping her off―so I didn’t have my usually luxurious seven 
　　minutes to beeline to the soup table and gulp it down back at my 
　　desk. The minutes ticked by and I was starving, but I just didn’t 
　　have the energy to weave through the Clackers and get examined by 
　　the cashier and wonder if I was doing permanent damage by swallowing 
　　piping hot (and fattening!) soup so fast that I could feel the heat 
　　coursing down my esophagus.Not worth it, I thought.Skipping a single 
　　meal won’t kill you, I told myself.In fact, according to every 
　　single one of your sane and stable coworkers, it’ll just make you 
　　stronger. And besides, $2,000 pants don’t look so hot on girls who 
　　gorge themselves, I rationalized. I slumped down in my chair and 
　　thought of how well I had just representedRunway magazine.


　　11

　　The Cell Phone shrilled from somewhere deep in my dream, but 
　　consciousness took over long enough for me to wonder if it was her. 
　　After a stunningly fast orientation process―Where am I? Who is 
　　“she”? What day is it?―I realized that having the phone ring at 
　　eight on a Saturday morning was not a good omen. None of my friends 
　　would be awake for hours, and after years of getting screened out, 
　　my parents had grudgingly accepted that their daughter wasn’t 
　　answering until noon. In the seven seconds it took to figure all 
　　this out, I was also contemplating a reason why I should pick up 
　　this phone call. Emily’s reasons from the first day came back to me, 
　　though, and so I started my arm in a floor sweep from the comfort of 
　　my bed. I managed to click it open just before it stopped ringing.

　　“Hello?” I was proud that my voice sounded strong and clear, as 
　　though I’d spent the past few hours working hard at something 
　　respectable rather than passed out in a sleep that was so deep, so 
　　intense, it couldn’t possibly have indicated good things about my 
　　health.

　　“Morning, honey! Glad to hear you’re awake. I just wanted to tell 
　　you that we’re in the sixties on Third, so I’ll be there in just ten 
　　minutes or so, OK?” My mom’s voice came booming over the line. 
　　Moving day! It was moving day! I’d forgotten entirely that my 
　　parents had agreed to come into the city to help me pack my stuff up 
　　and take it to the new apartment Lily and I had rented. We were 
　　going to lug the boxes of clothes and CDs and picture albums while 
　　the real movers tackled my massive bed frame.

　　“Oh, hi, Mom,” I mumbled, lapsing back into tired-voice mode. “I 
　　thought you were her.”

　　“Nope, you’ve got yourself a break today. Anyway, where should we 
　　park? Is there a garage right around there?”

　　“Yeah, right under my building, just enter right from Third. Give 
　　them my apartment number in the building and you’ll get a discount. 
　　I’ve got to get dressed. I’ll see you soon.”

　　“OK, honey. Hope you’re ready to work today!”

　　I fell back onto my pillow and considered my options for possibly 
　　going back to sleep. They were looking really grim, considering 
　　they’d driven all the way in from Connecticut to help me move. Just 
　　then, the alarm clock blared its signature static. Ah hah! So Ihad 
　　remembered that today was moving day. The reminder that I wasn’t 
　　going completely crazy was a small comfort.

　　Getting out of bed was, quite possibly, even harder to do than other 
　　days even though it was happening a few hours later. My body had 
　　been briefly tricked into thinking that it would actually get to 
　　catch up, had depended on reducing that infamous “sleep debt” we’d 
　　learned about in Psych 101, when I wrenched it from bed. There was a 
　　small pile of clothes I’d left folded by the bed, the only things 
　　besides my toothbrush that I hadn’t yet packed. I pulled on the blue 
　　Adidas windpants, the hooded Brown sweatshirt, and the pair of 
　　filthy gray New Balance sneakers that had accompanied me around the 
　　world. Not a second after I swooshed the last of my Listerine did 
　　the buzzer ring.

　　“Hi, guys. I’ll buzz you up, just a sec.”

　　There was a knock on the door two minutes later, and instead of my 
　　parents there stood a rumpled-looking Alex. He looked great, as 
　　usual. His faded jeans hung low on nonexistent hips, and his 
　　long-sleeved navy T-shirt was just the right amount of tight. The 
　　tiny wire-rims he wore only when he couldn’t tolerate his contacts 
　　were perched in front of very red eyes, and his hair was all over 
　　the place. I couldn’t stop myself from hugging him on the spot. I 
　　hadn’t seen him since the Sunday before, when we’d met for a quick 
　　midafternoon Coffee. We’d intended to spend the whole day and night 
　　together, but Miranda had needed an emergency babysitter for Cassidy 
　　so she could take Caroline to the doctor, and I had been recruited. 
　　I’d gotten Home too late to spend any real time with him, and he’d 
　　recently stopped camping out in my bed just to get a glimpse of me, 
　　which I understood. He’d wanted to stay over the night before, but I 
　　was still in that stage of parent-pretending: even though all 
　　parties involved knew that Alex and I were sleeping together, 
　　nothing could be done, said, or implied to actually confirm it. And 
　　so I hadn’t wanted him there when my parents arrived.

　　“Hey, babe. I thought you guys could use some help today.” He held 
　　up a Bagelry bag that I knew would contain salt bagels, my favorite, 
　　and some large coffees. “Are your parents here yet? I brought them 
　　Coffees, too.”

　　“I thought you had to tutor today,” I said just as Shanti emerged 
　　from her bedroom wearing a black pantsuit. She hung her head as she 
　　walked past us, mumbled something about working all day, and left. 
　　We so seldom talked, I wondered if she realized today was my last 
　　day in the apartment.

　　“I did, but I called the two little girls’ parents and both said 
　　that tomorrow morning was fine with them, so I’m all yours!”

　　“Andy! Alex!” My father stood in the doorway behind Alex, beaming as 
　　though this were the best morning on earth. My mom looked so awake I 
　　wondered if she was on drugs. I did a quick once-over of the 
　　situation and figured that they would rightly assume that Alex had 
　　just arrived since he was still wearing his shoes and was obviously 
　　holding recently purchased food. Besides, the door was still open. 
　　Phew.

　　“Andy said you couldn’t make it today,” my dad said, setting down 
　　what looked like a bag of bagels―also salt, no doubt―and Coffees on 
　　the table in the living room. He deliberately avoided eye contact. 
　　“Are you on your way in or out?”

　　I smiled and looked at Alex, hoping he wasn’t already regretting 
　　what he’d gotten himself into so early in the morning.

　　“Oh, I just got here, Dr. Sachs,” Alex said gamely. “I rearranged my 
　　tutoring because I thought you two could use another pair of hands.”

　　“Great. That’s great―I’m sure it’ll be a big help. Here, help 
　　yourself to bagels. Alex, I’m sorry to say that we didn’t get three 
　　Coffees since we didn’t know you’d be here.” My dad looked genuinely 
　　upset, which was touching. I knew he still had trouble with his 
　　youngest daughter having a boyfriend, but he did his best not to 
　　show it.

　　“No worries, Dr. S. I brought some stuff, too, so it looks like 
　　there’s plenty.” And somehow, my dad and my boyfriend sat down on 
　　the futon together―without a trace of awkwardness―and shared an 
　　early-morning breakfast.

　　I sampled salt bagels from each of their bags and thought about how 
　　much fun it would be to live with Lily again. We’d been out of 
　　college for nearly a year now. We’d tried to talk at least once a 
　　day, but it still felt like we hardly ever saw each other. Now, we 
　　would come Home to each other and bitch about our respective hellish 
　　days―just like old times. Alex and my dad prattled on about sports 
　　(basketball, I think) while my mom and I labeled the boxes in my 
　　room. Sadly, there wasn’t much: just a few boxes of bed linens and 
　　pillows, another of photo albums and assorted desk supplies (even 
　　though I lacked a desk), some makeup and toiletries, and a whole 
　　bunch of garment bags filled with un-Runway-esque clothes. Hardly 
　　enough to warrant labels; I guess it was the assistant in me kicking 
　　in.

　　“Let’s get moving,” my dad called from the living room.

　　“Shhh! You’ll wake Kendra,” I loudly whispered back. “It is only 
　　nine in the morning on a Saturday, you know.”

　　Alex was shaking his head. “Didn’t you see her leave with Shanti 
　　before? At least, I think that was her. There were definitely two of 
　　them, and they were both wearing suits and looking unhappy. Check 
　　their bedroom.”

　　The door to the room they managed to share by bunking their beds was 
　　ajar, and I pushed it open slightly. Both beds were made 
　　meticulously, pillows fluffed and matching stuffed Gund dogs propped 
　　up on each. I didn’t realize until then that I’d never so much as 
　　stepped foot in their room―in the few months I’d lived with these 
　　girls, we hadn’t had a conversation of longer than thirty seconds―I 
　　didn’t know exactly what they did, where they went, or if they had 
　　any friends besides each other. I was glad to be leaving.

　　Alex and my dad had cleaned up the leftover food and were trying to 
　　map out a game plan. “You’re right, they’re both gone. I don’t even 
　　think they know I’m leaving today.”

　　“Maybe leave them a note?” my mom suggested. “Maybe on your Scrabble 
　　board.” I’d inherited my father’s addiction to Scrabble, and he had 
　　a theory that each new Home required a new board so I was leaving 
　　the old one behind.

　　I took the last five minutes in the apartment to make the tiles 
　　read, “Thanks for everything and good luck XO Andy.” Fifty-nine 
　　points. Not bad.

　　It took an hour to pack both of the cars up, with me not doing much 
　　more than propping open the door to the street and guarding the 
　　vehicles while they went back upstairs. The bed movers―who were 
　　charging more than the actual cost of the damn thing―were running 
　　late, so my dad and Alex each started downtown. Lily had found our 
　　new apartment through an ad in theVillage Voice, and I hadn’t even 
　　seen it yet. She’d called me at work from her Cell Phone in the 
　　middle of the day, screaming, “I found it! I found it! It’s perfect! 
　　There’s a bathroom with running water, a wooden floor that only has 
　　minimal warping, and I’ve been here four full minutes and haven’t 
　　seen a single mouse or even a roach. Can you come see it 
　　immediately?”

　　“Are you high right now?” I whispered. “She’shere, which means I’m 
　　not going anywhere.”

　　“You have to comenow . You know what it’s like. I have my folder and 
　　everything.”

　　“Lily, be reasonable. I couldn’t leave the office right now for an 
　　emergency heart transplant if I needed one, without getting fired. 
　　How can I come look at an apartment?”

　　“Well, it’s not going to be here in thirty more seconds. There are 
　　at least twenty-five other people at this open house, and they’re 
　　all filling out applications. I need to do thisnow .”

　　In the obscene world of Manhattan real estate, semilivable 
　　apartments were rarer―and more desirable―than seminormal straight 
　　guys. When you added semiaffordable into the mix, they became harder 
　　to rent than your private island somewhere off the southern coast of 
　　Africa. Or probably harder. No matter that most boasted fewer than 
　　three hundred square feet of dirt and rotted wood, pockmarked walls, 
　　and prehistoric appliances. No roaches? No mice? This one was a 
　　keeper!

　　“Lily, I trust you, just do it. Can you e-mail me a description?” I 
　　was trying to get off the phone as quickly as possible since Miranda 
　　was due back from the art department any second. If she saw me on a 
　　personal call, I was finished.

　　“Well, I have copies of your paychecks―which, by the way, really 
　　suck . . . and I’ve got both our bank statements and printouts of 
　　our credit histories and your employment letter. The only problem is 
　　our guarantor. It has to be a tristate resident who makes more than 
　　forty times our monthly rent, and my grandmother sure as hell 
　　doesn’t make a hundred grand. Can your parents sign for us?”

　　“Jesus, Lil, I don’t know. I haven’t asked them, and I can’t very 
　　well call them right now. You call.”

　　“Fine. They do make enough, don’t they?”

　　I wasn’t really sure, but who else could we ask? “Just call them,” I 
　　told her. “Explain about Miranda. Tell them I’m sorry for not 
　　calling myself.”

　　“Will do,” she said. “But let me make sure we can get the place. 
　　I’ll call you back,” she said and clicked off the phone. The phone 
　　rang again twenty seconds later, and I saw her Cell Phone number on 
　　the office phone caller ID. Emily raised her eyes in that special 
　　way she did when she heard me once again talking to a friend. I 
　　grabbed the phone but spoke to Emily.

　　“It’s important,” I hissed in her direction. “My best friend is 
　　trying to rent me an apartment over the phone because I can’t leave 
　　here for a goddamn―”

　　Three voices attacked me at once. Emily’s was measured and calm and 
　　carried with it a warning tone. “Andrea, please,” she’d started, at 
　　the exact same time that Lily was shrieking, “They’ll do it, Andy, 
　　they’ll do it! Are you listening to me?” But even though both of 
　　them were clearly addressing me, I couldn’t really hear either one 
　　of them. The only voice that came through loud and clear was 
　　Miranda’s.

　　“Do we have a problem here, Ahn-dre-ah?” Shocker―she got my name 
　　right this time. She was hovering over me, appearing ready to 
　　strike.

　　I immediately hung up on Lily, hoping she’d understand, and braced 
　　myself for the onslaught. “No, Miranda, no problem at all.”

　　“Good. Now, I’d like a sundae and I’d like to actually eat it before 
　　the entire thing melts. Vanilla ice cream―not yogurt, mind you, not 
　　ice milk, and nothing sugar-free or low-fat―with chocolate syrup and 
　　real whipped cream. Not canned, you understand? Genuine whipped 
　　cream. That’s all.” She walked purposefully back toward the art 
　　department, and I was left with the distinct impression that she’d 
　　come in just to check on me. Emily smirked. The phone rang. Lily 
　　again. Dammit―couldn’t she just e-mail me? I picked it up and 
　　pressed it to my ear but said nothing.

　　“OK, I know you can’t talk, so I will. Your parents will be our 
　　guarantors, which is great. The apartment is a big one-bedroom, and 
　　once we put the wall up in the living room, there will still be room 
　　for a two-person couchand a chair. The bathroom doesn’t have a bath, 
　　but the shower looks OK. No dishwasher, natch, and no AC, but we can 
　　get window units. Laundry in the basement, part-time doorman, one 
　　block from the six train. And get this. A balcony!”

　　I must’ve breathed audibly, because she got even more excited at my 
　　excitement. “I know! Crazy, right? It looks like it might fall right 
　　off the side of the building, but it’s there! And we could both fit 
　　on it and have a place to smoke, and oh, it’s just perfect!”

　　“How much?” I croaked, determined that these would be the absolute 
　　last words I’d utter.

　　“All ours for the grand total of twenty-two eighty a month. Do you 
　　believe that we’ll get a balcony for eleven hundred forty dollars 
　　apiece? This place is the find of the century. So, can I do it?”

　　I was silent. I wanted to talk, but Miranda was inching her way back 
　　to her office as she upbraided the public events coordinator in 
　　front of everyone. She was in a wicked mood, and I’d already had 
　　enough for one day. The girl she was currently abusing had her head 
　　hung in shame, cheeks bright red, and I prayed for her own sake that 
　　she wouldn’t cry.

　　“Andy! This is fucking ridiculous. Just say yes or no! It’s bad 
　　enough that I have to cut class today and you can’t so much as leave 
　　work to come look at this place, but you can’t even bother to say 
　　yes or no? What am I―” Lily had reached her breaking point and I 
　　totally understood, but there was nothing I could do except hang up 
　　on her. She was screaming so loud into the phone that it was 
　　reverberating in the quiet office, and Miranda was standing less 
　　than five feet away. I was so frustrated, I wanted to grab the PR 
　　coordinator and hit the ladies’ room and cry with her. Or maybe if 
　　we worked together we could throw Miranda into a toilet stall and 
　　tighten that Hermès scarf that hung loosely around her skinny neck. 
　　Would I hold her down or pull? Or perhaps it’d be more effective to 
　　just shove the damn thing down her throat and watch her gasp for air 
　　and―

　　“Ahn-dre-ah!” Her voice was clipped, steely. “What did I ask you for 
　　a mere five minutes ago?” Shit! The sundae. I’d forgotten the 
　　sundae. “Is there a particular reason why you’re still sitting there 
　　instead of doing your job? Is this your idea of a joke? Did I do or 
　　say something to indicate that I wasn’t entirely serious? Did I? Did 
　　I?” Her blue eyes were bulging out of her face, and although she 
　　hadn’t fully raised her voice yet, of course, she was coming awfully 
　　close. I opened my mouth to speak but heard Emily talking instead.

　　“Miranda, I’m so sorry. It’s my fault. I asked Andrea to answer the 
　　phone because I thought it might be Caroline or Cassidy and I was on 
　　the other line ordering that shirt from Prada you wanted. Andrea was 
　　just on her way out. I’m sorry, and it won’t happen again.”

　　Miracle of miracles! The Perfect One had spoken, and in my defense, 
　　no less.

　　Miranda looked momentarily mollified. “Well, all right then. Get my 
　　sundae now, Andrea.” And with that, she walked in her office and 
　　picked up the phone, where she promptly started cooing to B-DAD.

　　I looked at Emily, but she was pretending to work. I shot her a 
　　one-word e-mail.Why? I wrote.

　　Because I wasn’t entirely sure she wasn’t going to fire you, and I 
　　don’t really feel like training someone new,she wrote back 
　　instantly. I left to go in search of this perfect sundae and called 
　　Lily from my Cell Phone as soon as the elevator hit the lobby.

　　“I’m sorry, I really am. It’s just that―”

　　“Look, I don’t really have time for this,” Lily said flatly. “I 
　　think you’re overreacting just a little bit, don’t you? I mean, you 
　　can’t so much as say yes or no on the phone?”

　　“It’s hard to explain, Lil, it’s just that―”

　　“Forget it. I’ve got to run. I’ll call you if we get it. Not that 
　　you really care either way.”

　　I tried to protest, but she’d hung up. Dammit! It wasn’t fair to 
　　expect Lily to understand when I would’ve thought I was ridiculous a 
　　mere four months earlier. It really wasn’t fair to send her all over 
　　Manhattan in search of an apartment we could both share when I 
　　wouldn’t even take her phone calls, but what choice did I have?

　　When she answered one of my calls right after midnight, she told me 
　　we got the apartment.

　　“That’s amazing, Lil. I can’t thank you enough. I swear I’ll make it 
　　up to you. I promise!” And then I had a thought. Be spontaneous! 
　　Call an Elias car and get up to Harlem and thank your best friend in 
　　person. Yes, that was it! “Lil, are you Home? I’m coming up to 
　　celebrate, OK?”

　　I thought she’d be thrilled, but she was quiet. “Don’t bother,” she 
　　said quietly. “I’ve got a bottle of So-Co and Tongue Ring Boy is 
　　here. I’ve got everything I want.”

　　It stung, but I understood. Lily rarely got mad, but when she did, 
　　no one could talk her out of it until she was good and ready. I 
　　heard liquid swishing into a glass and ice clinking, and I heard her 
　　take a deep, long swig.

　　“OK. But call me if you need anything, OK?”

　　“Why? So you can sit in silence on the other end? No thanks.”

　　“Lil―”

　　“Don’t worry about me. I’m just fine.” Another gulp. “I’ll talk to 
　　you later. And hey, congratulations to us.”

　　“Yeah, congratulations to us,” I repeated, but she’d already hung up 
　　once again.

　　I’d called Alex on his cell to ask if I could go over to his place, 
　　but he didn’t sound as delighted to hear from me as I’d hoped.

　　“Andy, you know I’d love to see you, but, well, I’m out with Max and 
　　the guys. You’re never really around during the week anymore, so I 
　　made plans to see them tonight.”

　　“Oh, well, are you guys in Brooklyn or around here somewhere? I 
　　could come meet you?” I asked, knowing that of course they were 
　　somewhere on the Upper East Side, probably very close to me, because 
　　that’s where all the other guys lived as well.

　　“Listen, any other night that’d be great, but tonight is definitely 
　　just a guys’ night.”

　　“Oh, sure, OK. I was going to meet Lily to celebrate the new 
　　apartment, but we, uh, sort of got in a fight. She doesn’t 
　　understand why I can’t really talk from work.”

　　“Well, Andy, I have to say, sometimes I don’t totally understand, 
　　either. I mean, I know she’s a tough lady―trust me, I do―it just 
　　seems that you take everything pretty seriously when it comes to 
　　her, you know?” He sounded like he was trying very hard to keep his 
　　tone accommodating and nonconfrontational.

　　“Maybe that’s because I do!” I shot back at him, pissed off at him 
　　for not wanting to see me and not begging me to go out with his 
　　friends and for taking Lily’s side even though she had a point and 
　　so did he. “It is my life, you know? My career. Myfuture . What the 
　　hell am I supposed to do? Treat it like a joke?”

　　“Andy, you’re twisting my words. You know that’s not what I meant.”

　　But I was already screaming back―I couldn’t help myself. First Lily 
　　and now Alex? Both on top of Miranda, all day, every day? It was too 
　　much, and I wanted to cry but all I could do was yell.

　　“A big fucking joke, huh? That’s what my job is to both of you!Oh, 
　　Andy, you work in fashion, how hard can it be? ” I mimicked, hating 
　　myself more with every passing second. “Well, excuse me if we can’t 
　　all be do-gooders or Ph.D. candidates! Excuse me if―”

　　“Call me when you calm down,” he stated. “I’m not going to listen to 
　　this anymore.” And he hung up. Hung up! I waited for him to call 
　　back, but he never did, and by the time I’d finally fallen asleep, 
　　close to three, I hadn’t heard from either Alex or Lily.

　　Now it was moving day―a full week later―and while neither was still 
　　visibly mad, neither seemed exactly the same either. There hadn’t 
　　been time to make amends in person with either one since we were in 
　　the middle of closing an issue, but I figured things would fall into 
　　place when Lily and I moved into our new apartment. Our shared 
　　apartment, where everything would go back to the way it was when we 
　　were in college and life was much more palatable.

　　The movers finally came at eleven, and it took them all of nine 
　　minutes to disassemble my beloved bed and throw the pieces in back 
　　of their van. Mom and I hitched a ride with them over to my new 
　　building, where my dad and Alex were schmoozing with the 
　　doorman―who, bizarrely enough, was a dead ringer for John 
　　Galliano―with my boxes piled against a wall in the lobby.

　　“Andy, glad you’re here. Mr. Fisher here won’t open the apartment 
　　unless there’s a tenant present,” my dad said with a huge smile on 
　　his face. “Which is very smart of him,” he added, winking at the 
　　doorman.

　　“Oh, is Lily not here yet? She said she’d get here by ten, 
　　ten-thirty.”

　　“Nope, haven’t seen her. Should I call her?” Alex asked.

　　“Yeah, I guess so. Why don’t I go up with, er, Mr. Fisher so we can 
　　start bringing stuff up. Ask her if she needs any help.”

　　Mr. Fisher smiled a way that could only be described as lecherous. 
　　“Please, we’re like family now,” he said, looking at my chest. “Call 
　　me John.”

　　I almost choked on the now cold Coffee I was holding and wondered if 
　　the man revered the world over for reviving the Dior brand had died 
　　without my knowing and been reincarnated as my doorman.

　　Alex nodded and wiped his glasses on his T-shirt. I loved it when he 
　　did that. “You go with your parents. I’ll call.”

　　I wondered if it was a good or bad thing that my father was now best 
　　friends with my (designer) doorman, the man who would inevitably 
　　know every detail of my life. The lobby looked nice, if a little 
　　retro. It was done in a light-colored stone of some sort, and there 
　　were a few uncomfortable-looking benches in front of the elevators 
　　and behind the mailroom. Our apartment was number 8C, and it faced 
　　southwest, which, from what I’d heard, was a good thing. John opened 
　　the door with his master key and stood back like a proud papa.

　　“Here she is,” he announced grandly.

　　I walked in first, expecting to be hit with an overpowering smell of 
　　sulfur or perhaps see a few bats winging their way around our 
　　ceiling, but it was surprisingly clean and bright. The kitchen was 
　　on the right, a narrow, one-person-wide strip with white tile floors 
　　and reasonably white Formica cabinets. The countertops were some 
　　sort of flecked granite imitation, and there was a microwave built 
　　in above the stove.

　　“This is great,” my mom said, pulling open the refrigerator. “It’s 
　　already got ice trays.” The movers pushed past us, grunting while 
　　they lugged my bed.

　　The kitchen opened to the living room, which had already been 
　　divided in two by a temporary wall to create a second bedroom. Of 
　　course, that meant that all the windows had been cut out of the 
　　living room entirely, but that was OK. The bedroom was a decent 
　　size―definitely bigger than the one I’d just left―and the sliding 
　　glass door leading to the balcony made up one whole wall. The 
　　bathroom was between the living room and the real bedroom and was 
　　done in Pepto pink tiling and pink paint. Oh well. Could be kitschy. 
　　I walked into the real bedroom, which was significantly bigger than 
　　the living room one and looked around. A tiny closet, a ceiling fan, 
　　and a small, dirty window that looked directly into an apartment in 
　　the building next door. Lily had wanted this one and I’d happily 
　　agreed. She preferred having the extra space since she spent so much 
　　time in her bedroom studying, but I’d rather have the light and the 
　　balcony entrance.

　　“Thanks, Lil,” I whispered to myself, knowing that Lily couldn’t 
　　possibly hear me.

　　“What’d you say, honey?” my mom asked, coming up behind me.

　　“Oh, nothing. Just that Lily did really, really well. I had no idea 
　　what to expect, but this is great, don’t you think?”

　　She looked like she was trying to find the most tactful way of 
　　saying something. “Yes, for New York, it’s a great apartment. It’s 
　　just hard to imagine paying so much and getting so little. You know 
　　your sister and Kyle only pay fourteen hundred a month total for 
　　their condo, and they have central air, marble bathrooms, brand-new 
　　dishwasher and washer-dryer, and three bedrooms and two bathrooms?” 
　　she pointed out, as if she were the first to make this realization. 
　　For $2,280 you could get a beachfront townhouse in LA, a three-story 
　　condo on a tree-lined street in Chicago, a four-bedroom split-level 
　　in Miami, or a goddamn castle with a moat in Cleveland. Yes, we knew 
　　this.

　　“And two parking spots, access to the golf course, gym, and pool,” I 
　　added helpfully. “Yeah, I know. But believe it or not, this is a 
　　great deal. I think we’ll be very happy here.”

　　She hugged me. “I think you will be, too. As long as you don’t work 
　　too hard to enjoy it,” she said lightly.

　　My dad walked in and opened the duffel bag that he’d been dragging 
　　around all day, one I’d assumed held racquetball clothes for his 
　　game later. But he pulled out a maroon box emblazoned with “Limited 
　　Edition!” across the front. Scrabble. The collector’s edition, where 
　　the board came mounted on its own lazy Susan and the squares had 
　　little raised borders so the letters didn’t slide around. We’d been 
　　admiring them together in specialty game stores for the past ten 
　　years, but no occasion had ever warranted purchasing one.

　　“Oh, Dad. You shouldn’t have!” I knew the board cost well over two 
　　hundred dollars. “Oh! I just love it!”

　　“Use it in good health,” he said, hugging me back. “Or better yet, 
　　to kick your old man’s ass, as I know you will. I remember when I 
　　used to let you win. I had to, or you’d stomp around the house, 
　　sulking all night. And now! Well, now my old brain cells are fried 
　　and I couldn’t beat you if I tried. Not that I won’t,” he added.

　　I was about to tell him that I’d learned from the best, but Alex had 
　　walked in. And he didn’t look happy.

　　“What’s wrong?” I immediately asked as he fidgeted with his 
　　sneakers.

　　“Oh, nothing at all,” he lied while glancing in the direction of my 
　　parents. He shot me a “just hold on a sec” look and said, “Here, I 
　　brought a box.”

　　“Let’s go get a few more,” my dad said to my mom, moving toward the 
　　door. “Maybe Mr. Fisher has some sort of cart. We could bring a 
　　bunch up at once. Be right back.”

　　I looked at Alex, and we both waited until we’d heard the elevator 
　　open and close.

　　“So, I just talked to Lily,” he said slowly.

　　“She’s not still mad at me, is she? She’s been so weird all week.”

　　“No, I don’t think it’s that.”

　　“So what is it?”

　　“Well, she wasn’t at Home . . .”

　　“So where is she? Some guy’s apartment? I can’t believe she’s late 
　　for her own moving day.” I yanked open one of the windows in the 
　　converted bedroom to let some of the cold air dissipate the smell of 
　　new paint.

　　“No, she was actually at a police precinct in midtown.” He looked at 
　　his shoes.

　　“She was where? Is she OK? Ohmigod! Was she mugged or raped? I have 
　　to go to her right away.”

　　“Andy, she’s fine. She was arrested.” He said it quietly, as if he 
　　were breaking the news to a parent that their child wasn’t going to 
　　pass fourth grade.

　　“Arrested? She was arrested?” I tried to stay calm, but I realized 
　　too late that I was screaming. My dad walked in, pulling a giant 
　　cart that looked ready to topple under the weight of unevenly 
　　stacked boxes.

　　“Who was arrested?” he asked off-handedly. “Mr. Fisher brought all 
　　this stuff up for us.”

　　I was racking my brain for a lie, but Alex stepped in before I could 
　　think of anything remotely plausible. “Oh, I was just telling Andy 
　　that I saw on VH-1 last night that one of the girls from TLC was 
　　arrested on drug charges. And she always seemed like one of the 
　　straighter ones . . .”

　　My dad shook his head and surveyed the room, only half listening and 
　　probably wondering when exactly Alex or myself had become so 
　　interested in female pop stars that we actually discussed it. “I’m 
　　thinking that the only real place your bed can go is with the head 
　　against the far wall,” he said. “Speaking of which, I better go see 
　　how they’re doing.”

　　I literally flung my body in front of Alex the minute the apartment 
　　door closed.

　　“Quickly! Tell me what happened. What happened?”

　　“Andy, you’re shrieking. It’s not so bad. Actually, it’s kind of 
　　funny.” His eyes crinkled as he laughed, and for a brief second he 
　　looked just like Eduardo. Ew.

　　“Alex Fineman, you better fucking tell me right now what happened 
　　with my best friend―”

　　“OK, OK, relax.” He was clearly enjoying this. “She was out with 
　　some guy last night that she referred to as Tongue Ring Boy―do we 
　　know who that is?”

　　I stared at him.

　　“Anyway, they went out for dinner and Tongue Ring Boy was walking 
　　her Home, and she thought it’d be fun to flash him, right there on 
　　the street outside the restaurant. ‘Sexy,’ she said. To get him 
　　interested.”

　　I envisioned Lily unwrapping a dinner mint and strolling outside 
　　after a romantic meal, only to pull away and yank up her shirt for a 
　　guy who’d paid to have someone ram a post through his tongue. Jesus.

　　“Oh no. She didn’t . . .”

　　Alex nodded somberly, trying not to laugh.

　　“You’re telling me my friend got arrested for showing her breasts? 
　　That’s ridiculous. This is New York. I see women every day who are 
　　practically topless―and that’s in the workplace!” I was shrieking 
　　again, but I couldn’t help it.

　　“Her bottom.” He was looking at his shoes again, and his face was so 
　　red, I couldn’t tell if he was embarrassed or hysterical.

　　“Her what?”

　　“Not her breasts. Her bottom. Her lower half. Like, all of it. Front 
　　and back.” An ear-to-ear grin had finally broken out, and he looked 
　　so delighted that I thought he might wet himself.

　　“Oh, say it isn’t true,” I moaned, wondering what my friend had 
　　gotten herself into now. “And a cop saw her and arrested her?”

　　“No, evidently two little kids saw her do it and pointed it out to 
　　their mother . . .”

　　“Oh, god.”

　　“So, the mother asked her to pull her pants back up, and Lily loudly 
　　told her what she could do with her opinions, and the woman went and 
　　found a cop standing on the next street over.”

　　“Oh, stop. Oh, please, just stop.”

　　“It gets better. By the time the woman and the cop came back, Lily 
　　and Tongue Ring Boy were going at it on the street, pretty hot and 
　　heavy from what she said.”

　　“Who is this? This is my friend Lily Goodwin? My sweet, adorable 
　　best friend from eighth grade now gets naked and hooks up on street 
　　corners? With guys who have tongue rings?”

　　“Andy, calm down. Really, she’s fine. The only reason the cop 
　　actually arrested her was because she gave him the finger when he 
　　asked if she had, in fact, pulled her pants down . . .”

　　“Oh, my god. I can’t take it anymore. This is what it must feel like 
　　to be a mother.”

　　“. . . but they let her go with just a warning, and she’s going back 
　　to her apartment to recover―sounds like she was pretty drunk. I 
　　mean, why else would someone flip off a police officer? So don’t 
　　worry. Let’s get you moved in and then we can go see her if you 
　　want.” He headed toward the cart my dad had left in the middle of 
　　the living room and started unloading boxes.

　　I couldn’t wait until later; I had to see what had happened. She 
　　picked up on the fourth ring, right before it clicked into voice 
　　mail, as if she’d been debating whether or not to answer it.

　　“Are you OK?” I asked her the second I heard her voice.

　　“Hey, Andy. Hope I’m not screwing up the move at all. You don’t need 
　　me, right? Sorry about all this.”

　　“No, I don’t care about that, I care about you. Are you OK?” It had 
　　just occurred to me that Lily may have spent the night at the police 
　　station, considering that it was early Saturday morning and she was 
　　just leaving. “Did you stay overnight? Injail? ”

　　“Well, yeah, I guess you could say that. It wasn’t so bad, nothing 
　　like TV or anything. I just slept in this room with one other 
　　totally harmless girl who was in for something just as stupid. The 
　　guards were totally cool―it really wasn’t a big deal. No bars or 
　　anything.” She laughed, but it sounded hollow.

　　I digested this for a moment, tried to reconcile the image of sweet 
　　little hippie Lily getting cornered in a urine-flooded cell by an 
　　extremely angry and possessive lesbian. “Where the hell was Tongue 
　　Ring Boy through all of this? Did he just leave you to rot in jail?” 
　　But before she could answer, it occurred to me: Where the hell was I 
　　through all of this? Why hadn’t Lily called me?

　　“He was actually really great, he―”

　　“Lily, why―”

　　“. . . offered to stay with me and even called his parents’ lawyer―”

　　“Lily. Lily! Stop for a second. Why didn’t you call me? You know I 
　　would’ve been there in a second and not left until they’d let you 
　　go. So why? Why didn’t you call me?”

　　“Oh, Andy, it doesn’t matter anymore. It really wasn’t that bad, I 
　　swear. I can’t believe how stupid I was, and trust me, I’m over 
　　getting that drunk. It’s just not worth it.”

　　“Why? Why didn’t you call? I was Home all night.”

　　“It’s not important, really. I didn’t call because I figured you 
　　were either working or really, really tired, and I didn’t want to 
　　bother you. Especially on a Friday night.”

　　I thought back to what I’d been doing the night before and the only 
　　thing that stuck clearly in my mind was watchingDirty Dancing on TNT 
　　for exactly the sixty-eighth time in my life. And out of all those 
　　times, that had been the first that I’d fallen asleep before Johnny 
　　announced, “No one puts Baby in the corner,” and proceeded to, quite 
　　literally, lift her off her feet, until Dr. Houseman admits that he 
　　knows Johnny wasn’t the one who got Penny in trouble, and claps him 
　　on the back and kisses Baby, who has recently reclaimed the name 
　　Frances. I considered the whole scene a defining factor in my 
　　identity.

　　“Working? You thought I was working? And what does too tired have to 
　　do with it when you need help? Lil, I don’t get it.”

　　“Look, Andy, let’s drop it, OK? You work constantly. Day and night, 
　　and lots of times on weekends. And when you’re not working, you’re 
　　complaining about work. Not that I don’t understand, because I know 
　　how tough your job is, and I know you work for a lunatic. But I 
　　wasn’t going to be the one to interrupt a Friday night when you 
　　might actually be relaxing or hanging out with Alex. I mean, he says 
　　he never sees you, and I didn’t want to take that away from him. If 
　　I’d really needed you, I would’ve called, and I know you would’ve 
　　come running. But I swear, it wasn’t so bad. Please, can we forget 
　　it? I’m exhausted and I really need a shower and my own bed.”

　　I was so stunned I couldn’t speak, but Lily took my silence for 
　　acquiescence.

　　“You there?” she asked after nearly thirty seconds, during which I 
　　was desperately trying to find the words to apologize or explain or 
　　something. “Listen, I just got Home. I need sleep. Can I call you 
　　later?”

　　“Um, uh, sure,” I managed. “Lil, I’m so sorry. If I’ve ever given 
　　you the impression that you can’t―”

　　“Andy, don’t. Nothing’s wrong―I’m fine, we’re fine. Let’s just talk 
　　later.”

　　“OK. Sleep well. Call me if I can do anything . . .”

　　“Will do. Oh, how’s the new place, by the way?”

　　“It’s great, Lil, it really is. You did a fantastic job with it. 
　　It’s better than I’d ever imagined. We’re going to love it here.” My 
　　voice sounded empty to my own ears, and it was obvious I was talking 
　　just for the sake of it, keeping her on the phone to make sure our 
　　friendship hadn’t changed in some inexplicable but permanent way.

　　“Great. I’m so glad you like it. Hopefully Tongue Ring Boy will like 
　　it, too,” she joked, although that, too, sounded hollow.

　　We hung up and I stood in the living room, staring at the phone 
　　until my mom walked in to announce that they were going to take Alex 
　　and me out for lunch.

　　“What’s wrong, Andy? And where’s Lily? I figured she’d need some 
　　help with her stuff, too, but we’re not going to stick around much 
　　after three. Is she on her way?”

　　“No, she’s, uh, she got sick last night. It’s been coming on for a 
　　few days, I guess, so she probably won’t move in until tomorrow. 
　　That was just her on the phone.”

　　“Well, you’re sure she’s all right? Do you think we should go over 
　　there? I always feel so badly for that girl―no real parents, just 
　　that cranky old bat of a grandmother.” She put her hand on my 
　　shoulder, as if to drive Home the pain. “She’s lucky she’s got you 
　　for a friend. Otherwise she’d be all alone in the world.”

　　My voice caught in my throat, but after a few seconds I managed a 
　　few words. “Yeah, I guess so. But she’s fine, she really is. Just 
　　going to sleep it off. Let’s get sandwiches, OK? The doorman said 
　　there’s a great deli four blocks down.”

　　“Miranda Priestly’s office,” I answered in my now usual bored tone 
　　that I hoped conveyed my misery to whoever was daring to interrupt 
　　my e-mailing time.

　　“Hi, is that Em-Em-Em-Emily?” asked a lisping, stuttering voice on 
　　the other end.

　　“No, it’s Andrea. I’m Miranda’s new assistant,” I said, even though 
　　I’d already introduced myself to a thousand curious callers.

　　“Ah, Miranda’s new assistant,” the strange female voice roared. 
　　“Aren’t you the luckiest girl in the w-w-w-world! How are you 
　　finding your tenure with supreme evil thus far?”

　　I perked up. This was new. In all the days I’d worked atRunway, I’d 
　　never met a single person who dared to badmouth Miranda so boldly. 
　　Was she serious? Could she be baiting me?

　　“Um, well, working atRunway has been a really great learning 
　　experience,” I heard myself stutter. “It’s a job a million girls 
　　would die for, of course.” Did I just say that?

　　There was a moment of silence, followed by a hyena-like howl. “Oh, 
　　that’s just f-f-f-fucking perfect!” she screeched, doing some sort 
　　of simultaneous laugh-choke. “Does she lock you in your West Village 
　　studio apartment and deprive you of all things G-g-g-gucci until 
　　you’re brainwashed enough to actually say shit like that? 
　　F-f-f-fantastic! That woman is really a piece of work! Well, Miss 
　　Learning Experience, I’d heard through the grapevine that Miranda 
　　had actually hired herself a thinking l-l-l-l-lackey this time 
　　around, but I see that the grapevine, as usual, is wrong. You like 
　　Michael Kors t-t-twinsets and all the pretty fur coats at J. 
　　Mendel’s? Yes, sweetie, you’ll do just fine. Now put that skinny-ass 
　　boss of yours on the phone.”

　　I was conflicted. My first impulse was to tell her to fuck off, tell 
　　her she didn’t know me, that it’s easy to see she tries to 
　　compensate for her stuttering with a major attitude problem. More 
　　than that, though, I wanted to press the phone close to my lips and 
　　urgently whisper, “I am a prisoner, more than you can 
　　imagine―please, oh, please, come and rescue me from this brainwash 
　　hell. You’re right, it’s just the way you describe, but I’m 
　　different!” But I didn’t get the chance to do either, because it 
　　finally occurred to me that I had no idea who owned the raspy, 
　　stuttering voice on the other end of the phone.

　　I sucked in my breath and decided to hit her point for point―on 
　　every subject but Miranda. “Well, I do adore Michael Kors, of 
　　course, but I must tell you that it’s certainly not because of 
　　histwinsets . Furs from J. Mendel’s are wonderful, of course, but a 
　　realRunway girl―that is, someone with discriminating and impeccable 
　　taste―would probably prefer something custom made from Pologeorgis 
　　on Twenty-ninth Street. Oh, and for the future, I’d prefer if you 
　　used the more casual ‘hired help’ instead of something as stiff and 
　　unforgiving as ‘lackey.’ Now, of course, I’ll be happy to correct 
　　any more incorrect assumptions you’d care to make, but maybe I could 
　　ask with whom am I speaking first?”

　　“Touché, Miranda’s new assistant, touché. You and I m-m-may be 
　　friends after all. I d-d-d-don’t much like the usual robots she 
　　hires, but it’s fitting because I don’t much like her. My name is 
　　Judith Mason, and in c-c-case you aren’t aware, I author your travel 
　　articles each m-m-m-month. Now, tell me this, since you’re still 
　　relatively new now: Is the h-h-honeymoon over?”

　　I was silent. What did she mean by this? It was like talking to a 
　　ticking bomb.

　　“Well? You’re in that fascinating window of time w-w-w-where you’ve 
　　been there long enough for everyone to know your name, but not long 
　　enough that they uncover and exploit all your weaknesses. It’s a 
　　really sweet feeling when th-th-th-that happens, trust me. You’re 
　　working in a really special place.”

　　But before I could respond, she said, “Enough f-f-f-flirting for 
　　now, my new friend. Don’t b-b-b-bother telling her it’s me, because 
　　she never takes my c-c-calls anyway. Stuttering pisses her off, I 
　　think. Just be sure to put my n-n-n-name down on the Bulletin so she 
　　can make someone else call me back. Thanks, l-l-love.” Click.

　　I hung up the phone, dumbfounded, and started to laugh. Emily looked 
　　up from one of Miranda’s expense reports and asked who it was. When 
　　I told her it was Judith, she rolled her eyes so deeply they almost 
　　didn’t resurface and whined, “She’s such a supreme bitch. I have, 
　　like, no idea how Miranda even speaks to her. She won’t take her 
　　calls, though, so you don’t even have to tell her she’s on the 
　　phone. Just put her on the Bulletin and Miranda will have someone 
　　else call her back.” It seems Judith understood the inner workings 
　　of our office better than I.

　　I double-clicked on the icon on my sleek turquoise iMac called 
　　“Bulletin” and glanced over its contents so far. The Bulletin was 
　　thepièce de résistance of Miranda Priestly’s office and, as far as I 
　　could see, her sole reason for living. Developed many years before 
　　by some high-strung, compulsive assistant, the Bulletin was simply a 
　　Word document that lived in a shared folder both Emily and I could 
　　access. Only one of us could open it at a time and add a new 
　　message, thought, or question to the itemized list. Then we’d print 
　　out the updated version and place it on the clipboard that sat on 
　　the shelf over my desk, removing the old ones as we went. Miranda 
　　would examine it every few minutes throughout the day as Emily and I 
　　struggled to type, print, and clip as quickly as the calls came in. 
　　Often we’d hiss at each other to close the Bulletin so the other 
　　could access it and write a message. We’d print to our separate 
　　printers simultaneously and dive for the clipboard, not knowing 
　　whose was the most recent until we were face to face.

　　“Judith’s the latest message on mine,” I said, exhausted from the 
　　pressure of trying to finish it before Miranda entered the suite. 
　　Eduardo had called from the security desk downstairs to warn us that 
　　she was on her way upstairs. We hadn’t gotten a call from Sophy yet, 
　　but we knew it’d be only seconds.

　　“I have the concierge from the Ritz Paris after Judith,” Emily 
　　near-shouted, triumphantly, while clipping her sheet to the Lucite 
　　clipboard. I took my four-second outdated Bulletin back to the desk 
　　and glanced over it. Dashes in phone numbers were not permissible, 
　　only periods. There were to be no colons in the time, only periods. 
　　Times must be rounded up or down to the nearest quarter-hour. 
　　Call-back phone numbers always got their own lines to make them 
　　easier to distinguish. A time listed indicated that someone had 
　　called in. The word “note” was something that Emily or I had to tell 
　　her (since addressing her without being first addressed was out of 
　　the question, all relevant info went on the Bulletin). “Reminder” 
　　was something Miranda had most likely left on one of our voice mails 
　　sometime between one and fiveA .M. the previous night, knowing that 
　　once it was recorded for us, it was as good as done. We were to 
　　refer to ourselves in the third person―if it was absolutely crucial 
　　for us to refer to ourselves at all.

　　She often asked us to find out exactly when and at what number a 
　　particular person would be available to speak. In this case it was a 
　　tossup whether the fruits of our investigation would go under “note” 
　　or “reminder.” I remember once thinking that the Bulletin read like 
　　a who’s who in the Prada crowd, but the names of the superbigmoney, 
　　the superhighfashion, and the generally superimpressive had ceased 
　　to register as “special” on my desensitized brain. In my newRunway 
　　reality, the White House social secretary held little more interest 
　　than the vet who needed to speak to her about the puppy’s 
　　vaccinations (fat chance of him getting a call back!).

　　Thursday, April 8

　　7.30: Simone called from the Paris office. She figured out dates 
　　with Mr. Testino for the Rio shoot and also confirmed with Giselle’s 
　　agent, but she still needs to discuss the fashion with you. Please 
　　call her.

　　011.33.1.55.91.30.65

　　8.15: Mr. Tomlinson called. He is on cell. Please call him.

　　Note: Andrea spoke with Bruce. He said that the large mirror in your 
　　foyer has a piece of decorative plaster missing from the upper 
　　left-hand corner. He located an identical mirror at an antique shop 
　　in Bordeaux. Would you like him to order it?

　　8.30: Jonathan Cole called. He is leaving for Melbourne on Saturday 
　　and would like to clarify the assignment before he leaves. Please 
　　call him.

　　555.7700

　　Reminder: To call Karl Lagerfeld about the Model of the Year party. 
　　He will be reachable at his Home in Biarritz this evening from 
　　8.00C8.30P .M. his time.

　　011.33.1.55.22.06.78: Home

　　011.33.1.55.22.58.29: Home studio

　　011.33.1.55.22.92.64: driver

　　011.33.1.55.66.76.33: assistant’s number in Paris, in case you 
　　cannot find him

　　9.00: Natalie from Glorious Foods called to see whether you’d prefer 
　　that the Vacherin be filled with mixed berries praline or warm 
　　rhubarb compote. Please call her.

　　555.9887

　　9.00: Ingrid Sischy called to congratulate you on the April issue. 
　　Says the cover is “spectacular, as always” and wants toknow who 
　　styled the front-of-book beauty shoot. Please call her.

　　555.6246: office

　　555.8833: Home

　　Note: Miho Kosudo called to apologize for being unable to deliver 
　　Damien Hirst’s flower arrangement. They said to be sure to tell you 
　　that they waited outside his building for four hours, but since he 
　　doesn’t have a doorman, they had to leave. They will try again 
　　tomorrow.

　　9.15: Mr. Samuels called. He will be unreachable until after lunch, 
　　but wants to remind you of parent-teacher conferences tonight at 
　　Horace Mann. He would like to discuss Caroline’s history project 
　　with you before hand. Please call him after 2.00P .M. but before 
　　4.00P .M.

　　555.5932

　　9.15: Mr. Tomlinson called again. He asked Andrea to make 
　　reservations for dinner tonight after parent-teacher conferences. 
　　Please call him. He is on cell.

　　Note: Andrea made reservations for you and Mr. Tomlinson tonight at 
　　8.00P .M. at La Caravelle. Rita Jammet said she is looking forward 
　　to seeing you again, and she’s delighted you chose her restaurant.

　　9.30: Donatella Versace called. She said everything’s confirmed for 
　　your visit. Will you be needing any staff besides a driver, a chef, 
　　a trainer, a hair and makeup person, a personal assistant, three 
　　maids, and a yacht captain? If so, please let her know before she 
　　leaves for Milan. She will also provide Cell Phones, but won’t be 
　　able to join you as she’ll be preparing for the shows.

　　011.3901.55.27.55.61

　　9.45: Judith Mason called. Please call her back.

　　555.6834

　　I crumpled the sheet and tossed it in the basket under my desk, 
　　where it immediately soaked up the leftover grease from Miranda’s 
　　third morning breakfast that I’d already thrown out. So far, a 
　　relatively normal day as far as the Bulletin was concerned. I was 
　　just about to click “inbox” on my Hotmail account to see if anyone 
　　had e-mailed yet when she cruised into the office. Damn that Sophy! 
　　She’d forgotten the warning call again.

　　“I expect the Bulletin is updated,” she said icily without making 
　　eye contact or otherwise acknowledging our presence.

　　“It is, Miranda,” I replied, holding it up to her so she needn’t so 
　　much as reach for it.Three words and counting, I thought to myself, 
　　predicting―and praying―it wouldn’t be more than a seventy-five-word 
　　day on my part. She removed her waist-length mink, so plush I had to 
　　restrain myself from burying my face into it right there, and tossed 
　　it onto my desk. As I went to hang that magnificent dead animal in 
　　the closet, trying to rub it discreetly against my cheek, I felt a 
　　quick shock of cold and wet: there were tiny bits of still-frozen 
　　sleet stuck to the fur. How fabulously apropos.

　　Pulling the lid from a lukewarm latte, I carefully arranged today’s 
　　greasy pile of bacon, sausage, and cheese-filled pastry on a filthy 
　　plate. I tiptoed into her office and carefully placed everything 
　　unobtrusively on a corner of her desk. She was concentrating on 
　　writing a note on her ecru Dempsey and Carroll stationery and spoke 
　　so softly I almost didn’t hear.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, I need to discuss the engagement party with you. Get a 
　　notebook.”

　　I nodded, simultaneously realizing that nodding doesn’t count as a 
　　word. This engagement party had already become the bane of my 
　　existence and it was still more than a month away, but since Miranda 
　　was leaving for the European shows soon and would be gone for two 
　　weeks, planning this party had occupied the vast majority of both 
　　our recent workdays. I returned to her office with a pad and pen, 
　　preparing myself to not understand a single word she’d say. I 
　　considered sitting for just a moment since it’d make taking 
　　dictation much more comfortable, but wisely resisted.

　　She sighed as though this were so taxing she wasn’t sure if she’d 
　　make it and tugged on the white Hermès scarf that she’d woven into a 
　　braceletlike thing around her wrist. “Find Natalie at Glorious Foods 
　　and tell her that I prefer the rhubarb compote. Do not let her 
　　convince you that she needs to speak with me directly, because she 
　　does not. Also talk to Miho and make sure they understand my orders 
　　for the flowers. Get Robert Isabell on the phone for me sometime 
　　before lunch to go over tablecloths, place cards, and serving trays. 
　　Also that girl from the Met to see when I can go over to make sure 
　　everything is set up properly, and tell her to fax over the table 
　　configurations so I may do seating charts. That’s all for now.”

　　She had rattled off that list without a single pause in her note 
　　writing, and when she finished speaking she handed me her newly 
　　crafted note to mail. I finished scribbling on my pad, hoping I’d 
　　understood everything correctly, which, considering the accent and 
　　the rapid-fire cadence, wasn’t always simple.

　　“OK,” I muttered and turned to go, bringing up my Total Miranda 
　　Words to four.Maybe I won’t break fifty, I thought. I could feel her 
　　eyes examining the size of my butt as I walked back to my desk and 
　　briefly considered whipping around to walk backward like a religious 
　　Jew would do when leaving the Wailing Wall. Instead, I tried to 
　　glide toward the hidden safety of my desk while picturing thousands 
　　and thousands ofHasidim in Prada black, walking backward circles 
　　around Miranda Priestly.


　　12

　　The blissful day I’d been waiting for, dreaming of, had finally, 
　　finally arrived. Miranda had not only departed the office, but she’d 
　　left the country as well. She’d jumped into her Concorde seat less 
　　than an hour before to meet with a few of the European designers, 
　　making me at present the indisputably happiest girl on the planet. 
　　Emily kept trying to convince me that Miranda was even more 
　　demanding when she was abroad, but I wasn’t buying it. I was in the 
　　middle of mapping out exactly how I was going to spend every 
　　ecstatic moment of the next two weeks when I got an e-mail from 
　　Alex.

　　Hey babe, how are you? Hope your day is at least ok. You must be 
　　loving that she left, right? Enjoy it. Anyway, just wanted to see if 
　　you think you’ll be able to call me around three-thirty today. I 
　　have a free hour then before the reading program starts and I need 
　　to talk to you. Nothing major, but I would like to talk. Love, A

　　To which I immediately worried and replied to ask if everything was 
　　OK, but he must have logged off right away because he never wrote 
　　back again. I made a mental note to call him at exactly 
　　three-thirty, loving the feeling of freedom that comes from knowing 
　　that She wouldn’t be around to screw it up. But just in case, I 
　　pulled a piece ofRunway stationery from the pile and wrote CALL A, 
　　3:30 P.M. TODAY and taped it to the side of my monitor. Just as I 
　　was going to call back a friend from school who’d left a message on 
　　my Home machine a week earlier, the phone rang.

　　“Miranda Priestly’s office,” I all but sighed, figuring that there 
　　wasn’t a single person on earth I wanted to speak with at that 
　　moment.

　　“Emily? Is that you? Emily?” The unmistakable voice filled the phone 
　　line and seemed to seep into the air in the office. Even though she 
　　couldn’t have possibly heard from across the suite, Emily looked up 
　　at me.

　　“Hello, Miranda. This is Andrea. May I help you with something?” How 
　　on earth was this woman calling? I quickly checked the itinerary 
　　that Emily had typed for everyone while Miranda was in Europe and 
　　saw that her flight had taken off a mere six minutes before and she 
　　was already calling from the seat phone.

　　“Well, I should hope so. I’ve looked at my itinerary and I just 
　　noticed that hair and makeup for Thursday before dinner is not 
　　confirmed.”

　　“Um, well, Miranda, that’s because Monsieur Renaud wasn’t able to 
　　get an absolute confirmation from the Thursday people, but he said 
　　it was ninety-nine percent that they’d be able to and―”

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, answer me this: Is ninety-nine percent the same as a 
　　hundred? Is it the same asconfirmed ?” But before I could answer I 
　　heard her tell someone, most likely a flight attendant, that she 
　　wasn’t “particularly interested in the rules and regulations 
　　regarding the use of electronics” and to “please bore someone else 
　　with them.”

　　“But ma’am, it’s against the rules, and I’m going to have to ask 
　　that you disconnect your call until we’ve reached a cruising 
　　altitude. It’s simply unsafe,” she said beseechingly.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, can you hear me? Are you listening . . .”

　　“Ma’am, I’m going to have to insist. Now please, hang up the phone.” 
　　My mouth was starting to ache from smiling so widely―I could only 
　　imagine how much Miranda was hating being addressed as “ma’am,” 
　　which, as everyone knows, connotes old lady all the way.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, thestewardess is forcing me to end this call. I’ll call 
　　you back when thestewardess allows me to do so. In the meantime, I 
　　want hair and makeup confirmed, and I’d like you to begin 
　　interviewing new girls for the nanny position. That’s all.” It 
　　clicked off, but not before I heard the flight attendant call her 
　　“ma’am” one last time.

　　“What did she want?” Emily asked, her forehead wrinkling in intense 
　　worry.

　　“She called me the right name three times in a row,” I gloated, 
　　happy to prolong her anticipation. “Three times, do you believe it? 
　　I think that means we’re best friends, doesn’t it? Who would’ve 
　　thought? Andrea Sachs and Miranda Priestly, BFF.”

　　“Andrea, what did she say?”

　　“Well, she wants the Thursday hair and makeup confirmed because 
　　clearly ninety-nine percent isn’t reassuring enough. Oh, and she 
　　said something about interviewing for a new nanny? I must’ve 
　　misunderstood that one. Whatever―she’ll call back in thirty 
　　seconds.”

　　Emily took a deep breath and willed herself to endure my stupidity 
　　with grace and style. It clearly wasn’t easy for her. “No, I don’t 
　　think you misunderstood at all. Cara is no longer with Miranda, so 
　　obviously she’ll be needing a new nanny.”

　　“What? What do you mean no longer ‘with Miranda’? If she’s no longer 
　　‘with Miranda,’ then where the hell is she?” I found it really hard 
　　to believe Cara wouldn’t have told me about her abrupt departure.

　　“Miranda thought Cara might be happier working for someone else,” 
　　Emily said in what I’m sure was much more diplomatic phrasing than 
　　Miranda herself had used. As if Miranda had ever been attuned to 
　　other people’s Happiness!

　　“Emily, please. Please tell me what really happened.”

　　“I gathered from Caroline that Cara had grounded the girls in their 
　　rooms after they talked back to her the other day. Miranda didn’t 
　　feel it was appropriate for Cara to be making these decisions. And I 
　　agree. I mean, Cara is not these girls’ mother, you know?”

　　So Cara had gotten fired because she made two little girls sit in 
　　their bedrooms after they’d surely given her attitude? “Yeah, I see 
　　your point. It’s definitely not a nanny’s job to look out for the 
　　well-being of her charges,” I said, nodding solemnly. “Cara was out 
　　of line there.”

　　Emily not only didn’t react to my dripping sarcasm, but didn’t seem 
　　to detect so much as a hint of it. “Exactly. And besides, Miranda 
　　never liked that Cara didn’t speak French. How are the girls 
　　supposed to learn to speak it without an American accent?”

　　Oh, I don’t know. Maybe from their $18,000-a-year private school, 
　　where French was a required subject and all three of the French 
　　teachers were native speakers? Or perhaps from their own fluent 
　　mother who had herself lived in France, still visited a half-dozen 
　　times a year and could read, write, and speak the language with 
　　perfect, lilting pronunciation? But instead I said, “Hey, you’re 
　　right. No French, no nanny. I hear you.”

　　“Well, regardless, it’s going to be your responsibility to find the 
　　girls a new nanny. Here’s the number of the agency we work with,” 
　　she said, sending it to me in an e-mail. “They know how 
　　discriminating Miranda is―and rightfully so, of course―so they 
　　usually give us good people.”

　　I looked at her warily and wondered what her life had been before 
　　Miranda Priestly. I got to sleep with my eyes open for a little 
　　while longer before the phone rang again. Blessedly, Emily answered 
　　it.

　　“Hello, Miranda. Yes, yes, I can hear you. No, no problem at all. 
　　Yes, I have confirmed hair and makeup for that Thursday. And yes, 
　　Andrea has already begun looking for new nannies. We’ll have three 
　　solid candidates ready for you to interview on your first day back.” 
　　She cocked her head to the side and touched her pen to her lips. 
　　“Mmm, yes. Yes, it’s definitely confirmed. No, it’s not ninety-nine 
　　percent, it’s one hundred percent. Definitely. Yes, Miranda. Yes, I 
　　confirmed it myself, and I’m quite positive. They’re looking forward 
　　to it. OK. Have a nice flight. Yes, it’s confirmed. I’ll fax it 
　　right now. OK. Good-bye.” She hung up the phone and appeared to be 
　　shaking.

　　“Why doesn’t that woman understand? I told her the hair and makeup 
　　were confirmed. And then I told her again. Why did I have to tell 
　　her fifty more times? And do you know what she said?”

　　I shook my head.

　　“Do you know what she said? She said that since this has all been 
　　such a headache for her, she’d like me to redo the itinerary so that 
　　it will reflect that hair and makeup is now confirmed and fax it to 
　　the Ritz so she’ll have the correct one when she arrives. I do 
　　everything for that woman―I give her mylife ―and this is how she 
　　talks to me in return?” She looked ready to cry. I was thrilled for 
　　the rare opportunity to see Emily turn on Miranda, but I knew that 
　　aRunway Paranoid Turnaround was imminent, so I had to proceed with 
　　caution. Strike just the right note of sympathy and indifference.

　　“It’s not you, Em, I promise. She knows how hard you work―you’re an 
　　amazing assistant to her. If she didn’t think you did a great job, 
　　she’d have gotten rid of you already. She’s not exactly scared to do 
　　it―you know what I mean?”

　　Emily had stopped tearing and was approaching the defiant zone 
　　where, even though she agreed with me, she’d defend Miranda if I 
　　said anything too outrageous. I’d learned about the Stockholm 
　　Syndrome in psych, in which the victims identify with their captors, 
　　but I hadn’t really understood how it all played out. Maybe I’d 
　　videotape one of the little sessions here between Emily and me and 
　　send it to the prof so next year’s freshmen could actually see it 
　　happening firsthand. All efforts to proceed carefully began to feel 
　　superhuman, so I took a deep breath and dove right in.

　　“She’s a lunatic, Emily,” I said softly and slowly, willing her to 
　　agree with me. “It’s not you, it’s her. She’s an empty, shallow, 
　　bitter woman who has tons and tons of gorgeous clothes and not much 
　　else.”

　　Emily’s face tightened noticeably, the skin on her neck and around 
　　her cheeks pulling taut, and her hands stopped shaking. I knew she 
　　was going to bulldoze me at any moment, but I couldn’t stop.

　　“Have you ever noticed that she has no friends, Emily? Have you? 
　　Sure, her phone rings day and night with the world’s coolest people, 
　　but they’re not calling to talk about their kids or their jobs or 
　　their marriages, are they? They’re calling because they need 
　　something from her. It sure seems awesome looking in, but can you 
　　imagine if the only reason anyone ever called you was because they―”

　　“Stop it!” she screamed, the tears streaming down her face again. 
　　“Just fucking shut up already! You march into this office and think 
　　you understand everything. Little Miss I’m So Sarcastic and So Above 
　　All This! Well, you don’t understand anything. Anything!”

　　“Em―”

　　“Don’t ‘Em,’ me, Andy. Let me finish. I know Miranda is difficult. I 
　　know she sometimes seems crazy. I know what it’s like to never sleep 
　　and always be scared she’s calling you and have none of your friends 
　　understand. I know all that! But if you hate it so much, if you 
　　can’t do anything but complain about it and her and everyone else 
　　all the time, then why don’t you just leave? Because your attitude 
　　is really a problem. And to say that Miranda is a lunatic, well, I 
　　think there are many, many more people out there who think she’s 
　　gifted and gorgeous and talented and would think you’re a lunatic 
　　for not doing your best to help out someone so amazing. Because she 
　　is amazing, Andy―she really is!”

　　I considered this for a moment and decided she had a point. Miranda 
　　was, as far as I could tell, a truly fantastic editor. Not a single 
　　word of copy made it into the magazine without her explicit, 
　　hard-to-obtain approval, and she wasn’t afraid to scrap something 
　　and start over, regardless of how inconvenient or unhappy it made 
　　everyone else. Although the various fashion editors called in the 
　　clothes to shoot, Miranda alone selected the looks she wanted and 
　　which models she wanted wearing each one; the sittings editors might 
　　be the ones at the actual shoots, but they were simply executing 
　　Miranda’s specific and incredibly detailed instructions. She had the 
　　final―and often even the preliminary―say over every single bracelet, 
　　bag, shoe, outfit, hair style, story, interview, writer, photo, 
　　model, location, and photograph in every issue, and that made her, 
　　in my mind, the main reason for the magazine’s stunning success each 
　　month.Runway wouldn’t beRunway ―hell, it wouldn’t be much of 
　　anything at all―without Miranda Priestly. I knew it and so did 
　　everyone else. What it hadn’t yet done was convince me that any of 
　　this gave her a right to treat people the way she did. Why was the 
　　ability to put together a Balmain evening gown and a brooding, leggy 
　　Asian girl on a side street in San Sebastian worshiped so much that 
　　Miranda wasn’t accountable for her behavior? I still wasn’t building 
　　the bridge, but what the hell did I know? Emily obviously got it.

　　“Emily, all I’m saying is that you’re a really great assistant to 
　　her, that she’s lucky she has someone who works as hard as you do, 
　　who’s so committed to the job. I just wish you’d realize that it’s 
　　not your fault if she’s unhappy with something. She’s just an 
　　unhappy person. There’s nothing more you could have done.”

　　“I know that. I really do. But you don’t give her enough credit, 
　　Andy. Think about it. I mean, really think about it. She is so 
　　incredibly accomplished, and she’s had to sacrifice a lot to get 
　　there, but couldn’t the same be said of supersuccessful people in 
　　every industry? Tell me, how many CEOs or managing partners or movie 
　　directors or whatever don’t have to be tough sometimes? It’s part of 
　　the job.”

　　I could tell we weren’t going to see eye to eye on this one. It was 
　　clear that Emily was deeply invested in Miranda, inRunway, in all of 
　　it, but I just couldn’t understand why. She wasn’t any different 
　　from the hundreds of other personal assistants and editorial 
　　assistants and assistant editors and associate editors and senior 
　　editors and editors in chief of fashion magazines. But I just didn’t 
　　understand why. From everything I’d seen so far, each one was 
　　humiliated, degraded, and generally abused by their direct superior, 
　　only to turn around and do it to those under them the second they 
　　got promoted. And all of it so they could say, at the end of the 
　　long and exhausting climb, that they’d gotten to sit in the front 
　　row at Yves Saint-Laurent’s couture show and had scored a few free 
　　Prada bags along the way?

　　Time to just agree. “I know,” I sighed, surrendering to her 
　　insistence. “I just hope you know that you’re doing her the favor by 
　　putting up with her shit, not the other way around.”

　　I expected a quick counter-attack, but Emily grinned. “You know how 
　　I just told her like a hundred times that her Thursday hair and 
　　makeup were confirmed?”

　　I nodded. She looked positively giddy.

　　“I was totally lying. I didn’t call a single person or confirm 
　　anything!” She practically sang the last part.

　　“Emily! Are you serious? What are you going to do now? You just 
　　swore up and down that you’d personally confirmed it.” For the first 
　　time since starting work, I wanted to hug the girl.

　　“Andy, be serious. Do you honestly think that any sane person is 
　　going to say no to doing her hair and makeup? It could make his 
　　whole career―he’d be crazy to turn her down. I’m sure the guy was 
　　planning to do it all along. He was probably just rearranging his 
　　travel plans or something. I don’t have to confirm with him, because 
　　I’m that sure he’ll do it. How could henot ? She’s Miranda 
　　Priestly!”

　　Now I thought I would cry, but instead I just said, “So what do I 
　　need to know to hire this new nanny? I should probably get started 
　　right away.”

　　“Yeah,” she agreed, still looking delighted with her own cleverness. 
　　“That’s probably a good idea.”

　　The first girl I interviewed for the nanny position looked 
　　positively shell-shocked.

　　“Oh my god!” she’d howled when I asked her over the phone if she’d 
　　mind coming to the office to meet with me. “Oh my god! Are you 
　　serious? Oh my god!”

　　“Um, is that a yes or a no?”

　　“God, yes. Yes, yes, yes! ToRunway ? Oh my god. Wait until I tell my 
　　friends. They’ll die. They’ll absolutely die. Just tell me where to 
　　be and when.”

　　“You understand that Miranda’s away right now, so you won’t be 
　　meeting with her, right?”

　　“Yep. Totally.”

　　“And you also know that the job is being a nanny to Miranda’s two 
　　daughters, right? That it won’t have anything to do withRunway ?”

　　She sighed as if to resign herself to the sad, unfortunate fact. 
　　“Yes, of course. A nanny, I totally get it.”

　　Well, she hadn’t really gotten it, because even though she looked 
　　the part (tall, impeccably groomed, reasonably well dressed, and 
　　seriously underfed), she kept asking which parts of the job would 
　　require her to be at the office.

　　I shot her a specialty Withering, but she didn’t seem to notice. 
　　“Um, none. Remember, we talked about this? I’m just doing some 
　　initial screening for Miranda, and we just happen to be doing it in 
　　the office. But that’s it. Her twins don’t live here, you know?”

　　“Right, right,” she’d agreed, but I’d already nixed her.

　　The next three the agency had waiting in the reception area weren’t 
　　much better. Physically, all fit the Miranda profile―the agency 
　　really did know exactly what she wanted―but not one had what I’d be 
　　looking for in a nanny who’d be taking care of my future niece or 
　　nephew, the standard I’d set for the process. One had a master’s in 
　　child development from Cornell but glazed over when I tried to 
　　describe the subtle ways this job might be different from others 
　　she’d held. Another had dated a famous NBA player, which she felt 
　　gave her “insight into celebrity.” But when I’d asked her if she’d 
　　ever worked with the children of celebrities, she’d instinctively 
　　wrinkled her nose and informed me that “famous people’s kids always 
　　have, like, major issues.” Nixed. The third and most promising had 
　　grown up in Manhattan and had just graduated from Middlebury and 
　　wanted to spend a year as a nanny to save some money for a trip to 
　　Paris. When I asked if that meant she spoke French, she nodded. The 
　　only problem was that she was a city girl through and through and 
　　therefore didn’t have a driver’s license. Was she willing to learn? 
　　I’d asked. No, she’d answered. She didn’t believe that the streets 
　　needed another car clogging them. Nix number three. I spent the rest 
　　of the day trying to figure out a tactful way of telling Miranda 
　　that if a girl is attractive, athletic, comfortable with celebrity, 
　　lives in Manhattan, has a driver’s license, can swim, has an 
　　advanced degree, speaks French, and is completely and entirely 
　　flexible with her time, then chances are she does not want to be a 
　　nanny.

　　She must have read my mind, because the phone rang immediately. I 
　　did a few calculations and realized that Miranda would have just 
　　landed at de Gaulle, and a quick glance at the second-by-second 
　　itinerary Emily had so painstakingly constructed showed she would 
　　now be in the car on her way to the Ritz.

　　“Miranda Pri―”

　　“Emily!” she practically shrieked. I wisely decided now wasn’t the 
　　time to correct her. “Emily! The driver did not give me my usual 
　　phone, and as a result I don’t have anyone’s phone number. This is 
　　unacceptable. Entirely unacceptable. How am I supposed to conduct 
　　Business with no phone numbers? Connect me immediately to Mr. 
　　Lagerfeld.”

　　“Yes, Miranda, please hold just a moment.” I jabbed the hold button 
　　and called out to Emily for help, although I would’ve had better 
　　luck simply eating the receiver whole than actually locating Karl 
　　Lagerfeld in less time than it took Miranda to get so annoyed that 
　　she’d smash down the phone and keep calling to ask, “Where the hell 
　　is he? Why can’t you find him? Do you not know how to use a phone?”

　　“She wants Karl,” I called over to Emily. The name immediately sent 
　　her flying, racing, tearing through papers all over her desk.

　　“OK, listen. We have twenty to thirty seconds. You take Biarritz and 
　　the driver, I’ll get Paris and the assistant,” she called, her 
　　fingers already flying across the keypad. I double-clicked on the 
　　thousand-plus name contact list that we shared on our hard drives 
　　and found exactly five numbers I’d have to call: Biarritz main, 
　　Biarritz second main, Biarritz studio, Biarritz pool, and Biarritz 
　　driver. A quick glance over the other listings for Karl Lagerfeld 
　　indicated that Emily had a grand total of seven, and there were 
　　still more numbers for New York and Milan. We were dead before we 
　　started.

　　I’d tried Biarritz main and was in the middle of dialing Biarritz 
　　second main when I saw that the flashing red light had stopped 
　　blinking. Emily announced that Miranda had hung up, in case I hadn’t 
　　noticed. Only ten or fifteen seconds had passed―she was feeling 
　　particularly impatient today. Naturally, the phone rang again 
　　immediately, and Emily responded to my pleading puppy eyes and 
　　answered it. She didn’t get halfway through her canned greeting 
　　before she was nodding gravely and trying to reassure Miranda. I was 
　　still dialing and had―miraculously―made it to Biarritz pool, where I 
　　was currently talking to a woman who didn’t speak a single word, a 
　　single syllable, of English. Maybe this was the obsession with 
　　speaking French?

　　“Yes, yes, Miranda. Andrea and I are calling right now. It should 
　　only be a few more seconds. Yes, I understand. No, I know it’s 
　　frustrating. If you’ll allow me to just put you on hold for ten 
　　seconds or so, I’m sure we’ll have him on the line. OK?” She punched 
　　“hold” and kept right on jabbing numbers. I heard her trying in what 
　　sounded like horrifically accented and broken French to talk to 
　　someone who appeared to not know the name Karl Lagerfeld. We were 
　　dead. Dead. I was getting ready to hang up on the crazy French woman 
　　who was shrieking into the receiver when I saw the flashing red 
　　light go out again. Emily was still frantically dialing.

　　“She’s gone!” I called with the urgency of an EMT performing 
　　emergency CPR.

　　“Your turn to get it!” she screamed back, fingers flying, and sure 
　　enough, the phone rang again.

　　I picked it up and didn’t even attempt to say anything, since I knew 
　　the voice on the other end would speak up immediately. It did.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah! Emily! Whoever the hell I’m talking to . . . why is it 
　　that I’m speaking with you and not with Mr. Lagerfeld? Why?”

　　My first instinct was to remain silent, since it didn’t appear that 
　　the verbal barrage was over, but as usual, my instincts were wrong.

　　“Hell-ooo?Anyone there? Is the process of connecting one phone call 
　　to another really too difficult forboth my assistants?”

　　“No, Miranda, of course not. I’m sorry about this―” My voice was 
　　shaking a little, but I couldn’t get it under control. “―it’s just 
　　that we can’t seem to find Mr. Lagerfeld. We’ve already tried at 
　　least eight―”

　　“Can’t seem to find him?”she mimicked in a high-pitched voice. “What 
　　do you mean, you ‘can’t seem to find’ him?”

　　What part of that simple five-word sentence did she not comprehend, 
　　I wondered. Can’t. Seem. To. Find. Him. Seemed rather clear and 
　　precise to me: We can’t fucking find him. That is why you’re not 
　　talking to him. Ifyou can find him, thenyou can talk to him. A 
　　million barbed responses raced around my head, but I could only 
　　sputter like a first-grader who’d been singled out by the teacher 
　　for talking in class.

　　“Um, well, Miranda, we’ve called all of the numbers we have listed 
　　for him, and he doesn’t appear to be at any of them,” I managed.

　　“Well of course he’s not!” She was almost screaming now, that 
　　precious, well-guarded cool was precariously close to collapsing. 
　　She took a deep, exaggerated breath and said calmly, “Ahn-dre-ah. 
　　Are you aware that Mr. Lagerfeld is in Paris this week?” I felt like 
　　we were doing English As a Second Language lessons.

　　“Of course, Miranda. Emily has been trying all the numbers in―”

　　“And are you aware that Mr. Lagerfeld said he’d be available on his 
　　mobile phone while he was in Paris?” Every muscle in her throat 
　　strained to keep her voice even and calm.

　　“Well, no, we don’t have a cell number listed in the directory, so 
　　we didn’t know that Mr. Lagerfeld even had a Cell Phone. But Emily 
　　is on the phone with his assistant right now, and I’m sure she’ll 
　　have that number in just a minute.” Emily gave me the thumbs-up 
　　right before she scribbled something and exclaimed, “Merci,oh yes, 
　　thank you, I mean,merci ” over and over again.

　　“Miranda, I have the number right here. Would you like me to connect 
　　you now?” I could feel my chest puff out with confidence and pride. 
　　A job well done! A superior performance under the most 
　　pressure-filled conditions. Never mind that my really cute peasant 
　　blouse that had been complimented by two―not one, but two―fashion 
　　assistants was now sporting sweat stains under the arms. Who cared? 
　　I was about to get this stark raving mad lunatic of an international 
　　caller off my back, and I was thrilled.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah?” It sounded like a question, but I was only 
　　concentrating on trying to figure out a pattern for indiscriminate 
　　name mix-ups. At first I’d thought she did it deliberately in an 
　　attempt to belittle and humiliate us even more, but then I figured 
　　out that she was probably quite satisfied with the levels of 
　　belittlement and humiliation we endured and so she did it only 
　　because she couldn’t be bothered to keep straight details so inane 
　　as her two assistants’ names. Emily had confirmed this by saying 
　　that she called her Emily about half the time but called her a 
　　mixture of Andrea and Allison―the assistant before her―the other 
　　half. I felt better.

　　“Yes?” Squeaking again. Dammit! Wasn’t it possible for me to have 
　　just a tiny bit of dignity with this woman?

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, I don’t know what all the fuss is over finding Mr. 
　　Lagerfeld’s mobile number when I have it right here. He gave it to 
　　me just five minutes ago, but we were disconnected and I can’t seem 
　　to dial correctly.” She said the last part as though the entire 
　　world was to blame for this irritation and inconvenience except for 
　　herself.

　　“Oh. You, um, you have the number? And you knew he was on that 
　　number the whole time?” I was saying it for Emily’s benefit, and it 
　　only served to enrage Miranda even more.

　　“Am I not making myself perfectly clear here? I need you to connect 
　　me to 03.55.23.56.67.89. Immediately. Or is that too difficult?”

　　Emily was slowly shaking her head in disbelief as she crumpled up 
　　the number we’d both just fought so hard to get.

　　“No, no, Miranda, of course that’s not too difficult. I’ll connect 
　　you right away. Hold just a minute.” I hit “conference,” dialed the 
　　numbers, heard an older man shout “Allo!” into the phone, and hit 
　　conference again. “Mr. Lagerfeld, Miranda Priestly, you’re 
　　connected,” I stated like one of those manual operators from 
　　theLittle House on the Prairie days. And instead of putting the 
　　whole call on mute and then hitting speaker so Emily and I could 
　　listen in on the call together, I just hung up. We sat in silence 
　　for a few minutes as I tried to refrain from badmouthing Miranda 
　　immediately. Instead, I mopped some dampness from my forehead and 
　　took long, deep breaths. She spoke first.

　　“So, let me just get this straight. She had his number the entire 
　　time but just didn’t know how to dial it?”

　　“Or maybe she just didn’t feel like dialing it,” I added helpfully, 
　　always enthusiastic for the chance to team up against Miranda, 
　　especially considering how rare the opportunities were with Emily.

　　“I should’ve known,” she said, shaking her head like she was 
　　horribly disappointed with herself. “I really should’ve known that. 
　　She always calls to have me connect her to people who are staying in 
　　the next room, or who are in a hotel two streets over. I remember I 
　　thought that was the weirdest thing, calling from Paris to New York 
　　to have someone connect you to someone in Paris. Now it just seems 
　　normal, of course, but I can’t believe I didn’t see that one 
　　coming.”

　　I was about to run to the dining room for lunch, but the phone rang 
　　again. Operating under the lightning-doesn’t-strike-twice theory, I 
　　decided to be a sport and answer the phone.

　　“Miranda Priestly’s office.”

　　“Emily! I am standing in the pouring rain on the rue de Rivoli and 
　　my driver has vanished. Vanished! Do you understand me? Vanished! 
　　Find him immediately!” She was hysterical, my very first time 
　　hearing her that way, and I wouldn’t have been surprised to learn it 
　　was the only time.

　　“Miranda, just a moment. I have his number right here.” I turned to 
　　scan my desk for the itinerary I’d set down a moment earlier, but 
　　all I saw were papers, old Bulletins, stacks of back issues. Only 
　　three or four seconds had passed, but I felt as if I were standing 
　　right next to her, watching as the rain poured down on her Fendi fur 
　　and caused the makeup to melt down the side of her face. Like she 
　　could just reach out and slap my face, tell me I’m a worthless piece 
　　of shit with zero talent, no skill set, a complete and total loser. 
　　There wasn’t time to talk myself down, remind myself that this was 
　　merely a human being (theoretically) who wasn’t happy to be standing 
　　in the rain and was taking it out on her assistant 3,600 miles away. 
　　It’s not my fault. It’s not my fault. It’s not my fault.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah! My shoes areruined . Do you hear me? Are you even 
　　listening? Find my drivernow! ”

　　I was at risk of some inappropriate emotion―I could feel the knot in 
　　the back of my throat, the tightening of the muscles in the back of 
　　my neck, but it was too early to tell if I would laugh or cry. 
　　Either one: not good. Emily must have sensed as much, because she 
　　leapt out of her seat and handed me her copy of the itinerary. She’d 
　　even highlighted the driver’s contact numbers, three in all, one for 
　　the car phone, his mobile phone, and his Home phone. Naturally.

　　“Miranda, I’m going to need to put you on hold while I call him. Can 
　　I put you on hold?” I didn’t wait for a response, which I knew would 
　　drive her crazy, and threw the call on hold. I dialed Paris again. 
　　The good news was the driver picked up on the first ring of the 
　　first number I tried. The bad news was he didn’t speak English. 
　　Although I’d never been self-destructive before, I couldn’t help but 
　　smash my forehead firmly into the Formica. Three times of this, and 
　　Emily had picked up the line at her desk. She’d resorted to 
　　screaming, not so much in attempt to make the driver understand her 
　　own bad French, but simply because she was trying to impress upon 
　　him the urgency of the current situation. New drivers always took a 
　　little breaking in, mostly because they foolishly believed that if 
　　Miranda had to wait forty-five seconds to a minute extra, she’d be 
　　all right. This was precisely the notion of which Emily and I were 
　　to disabuse them.

　　We both put our heads down a few minutes later, after Emily had 
　　managed to insult the driver enough that he’d hightailed it back to 
　　where he’d left Miranda three or four minutes earlier. I wasn’t 
　　particularly hungry for lunch anymore, a phenomenon that made me 
　　nervous. WasRunway rubbing off? Or was it just the adrenaline and 
　　nerves mixing together to guarantee no appetite? That was it! The 
　　starvation so endemic atRunway was not, in fact, self-induced; it 
　　was merely the physiological response of bodies that were so 
　　consistently terrified and all-around anxiety-ridden that they were 
　　never actually hungry. I vowed to look into this a little more and 
　　perhaps explore the possibility that Miranda was smarter than all of 
　　this and had deliberately created a persona so offensive on every 
　　level that she literally scared people skinny.

　　“Ladies, ladies, ladies! Pick those heads up off those desks! Can 
　　you imagine Miranda seeing you now? She wouldn’t be very happy!” 
　　James sang from the doorway. He had slicked back his hair using some 
　　greasy, waxy stuff called Bed Head (“Hot name―how can you resist?”) 
　　and was wearing some sort of skintight football jersey with the 
　　number 69 on both the front and the back. As always, a picture of 
　　subtlety and understatement.

　　Neither of us so much as glanced at him. The clock said it was only 
　　four, but it felt like midnight.

　　“OK then, let me guess. Mama’s been calling off the hook because she 
　　lost an earring somewhere between the Ritz and Alain Ducasse and she 
　　wants you to find it, even though it’s in Paris and you’re in New 
　　York.”

　　I snorted. “You think that would put us in this condition? That’s 
　　ourjob . We do that every day. Give us something difficult.”

　　Even Emily laughed. “Seriously, James, not good enough. I could find 
　　an earring in under ten minutes in any city in the world,” she said, 
　　all of a sudden inspired to join in for reasons I didn’t understand. 
　　“It’d only be a challenge if she didn’t tell us what city she’d lost 
　　it in. But I bet even then we could do it.”

　　James was backing himself away from the office, a look of feigned 
　　horror on his face. “All right, then, ladies, you have a great day, 
　　you hear? At least she hasn’t fucked you both up for good. I mean, 
　　seriously, thank god for that, right? You’re bothtooootally sane. 
　　Yeah. Um, have a great day . . .”

　　“NOT SO FAST THERE, YOU PANSY!” shrieked someone very loud and very 
　　high-pitched. “I WANT YOU TO MARCH YOUR WAY BACK IN THERE AND TELL 
　　THE GIRLS WHAT YOU WERE THINKING WHEN YOU PUT THAT SHMATA ON THIS 
　　MORNING!” Nigel grabbed James by the left ear and dragged him into 
　　the area between our desks.

　　“Oh, come on, Nigel,” James whined, pretending to be annoyed but 
　　obviously delighted that Nigel was touching him. “You know you love 
　　this top!”

　　“LOVE THAT TOP? YOU THINK I LOVE THAT FRATTY, GAY-JOCK LOOK YOU’VE 
　　GOT GOING? JAMES, YOU NEED TO RETHINK HERE, OK? OK?”

　　“What’s wrong with a tight football jersey? I think it looks hot.” 
　　Emily and I nodded in quiet alliance with James. It may not have 
　　been exactly tasteful, but he did look incredibly hip. And besides, 
　　it was kind of tough to be taking fashion advice from a man who was, 
　　at that precise moment, wearing zebra-print boot-cut jeans and a 
　　black V-neck sweater with a keyhole cut out in the back to reveal 
　　rippling back muscles. The whole ensemble was topped off with a 
　　floppy straw hat and a touch (subtle, I’ll give him that!) of kohl 
　　eyeliner.

　　“BABY BOY, fashion IS NOT FOR advertising YOUR FAVE SEX ACTS ON YOUR 
　　SHIRT. UNH-UNH, NO IT’S NOT! YOU WANNA SHOW A LITTLE SKIN? THAT’S 
　　HOT! YOU WANNA SHOW SOME OF THOSE TIGHT, YOUNG CURVES OF 
　　YOURS?THAT’S HOT. CLOTHING IS NOT FOR TELLING THE WORLD WHAT 
　　POSITION YOU PREFER, BOYFRIEND. NOW DO YOU UNDERSTAND?”

　　“But, Nigel!” A look of defeat was carefully constructed to disguise 
　　how pleased he was to be the center of Nigel’s attention.

　　“DON’T ‘NIGEL’ ME, HONEY. GO TALK TO JEFFY AND TELL HIM I SENT YOU. 
　　TELL HIM TO GIVE YOU THE NEW CALVIN TANK WE CALLED IN FOR THE MIAMI 
　　SHOOT. IT’S THE ONE THAT GORGEOUS BLACK MODEL―OH MY, HE’S AS TASTY 
　　AS A THICK, CHOCOLATE MILKSHAKE―IS ASSIGNED TO WEAR. GO ON NOW, 
　　SHOO. BUT BE SURE TO COME BACK HERE AND SHOW ME WHAT YOU LOOK LIKE!”

　　James scampered off like a recently fed bunny rabbit, and Nigel 
　　turned to look at us. “HAVE YOU PUT IN HER CLOTHING ORDER YET?” he 
　　asked no one in particular.

　　“No, she won’t choose until she has the look-books,” Emily answered, 
　　looking bored. “She said she’ll do it when she gets back.”

　　“WELL, JUST BE SURE TO LET ME KNOW AHEAD OF TIME SO I CAN CLEAR MY 
　　SCHEDULE FOR THAT PARTY!” He took off in the direction of the 
　　Closet, probably to try to catch a glimpse of James changing.

　　I’d already lived through one round of Miranda wardrobe ordering, 
　　and it hadn’t been pretty. When at the shows, she went from runway 
　　to runway, sketchbook in hand, preparing herself to come back to the 
　　States and tell New York society what they would be wearing―and 
　　middle America what they’d like to be wearing―via the only runway 
　　that actually mattered. Little did I know that Miranda was also 
　　paying particular attention to the outfits cruising down the runways 
　　because it was her first glance at what she herself would be wearing 
　　in the upcoming months.

　　A couple weeks after returning to the office, Miranda had handed 
　　Emily a list of designers whose look-books she’d like to see. As the 
　　usual suspects rushed to get their books put together for her―their 
　　runway photographs often weren’t even developed, never mind 
　　airbrushed and bound, before she demanded to see them―everyone 
　　atRunway was put on alert that the books would be arriving. Nigel 
　　would need to be ready, of course, to help her flip through them all 
　　and select her personal outfits. An accessories editor should be on 
　　hand to choose bags and shoes, and perhaps an extra fashion editor 
　　to ensure that everyone was in agreement―especially if the order 
　　included something big, like a fur coat or an evening gown. When the 
　　various houses had finally pieced together the different items she’d 
　　requested, Miranda’s personal tailor would come toRunway for a few 
　　days to fit everything. Jeffy would completely empty out the Closet, 
　　and no one would really be able to get any work done at all, since 
　　Miranda and her tailor would be holed up in there for hours on end. 
　　On the first go-round of fittings, I’d walked by the Closet just in 
　　time to hear Nigel shouting, “MIRANDA PRIESTLY! TAKE THAT RAG OFF 
　　THIS SECOND. THAT DRESS MAKES YOU LOOK LIKE A SLUT! A COMMON WHORE!” 
　　I’d stood outside with my ear pressed to the door―literally risking 
　　life and limb if it were to swing open―and waited for her to upbraid 
　　him in that special way of hers, but all I heard was a quiet murmur 
　　of agreement and the rustling of the fabric as she removed the 
　　dress.

　　Now that I had been there long enough, it seemed as though the honor 
　　of ordering Miranda’s clothes would fall to me. Four times a year, 
　　like clockwork, she flipped through look-books like they were her 
　　own personal catalogs and selected Alexander McQueen suits and 
　　Balenciaga pants like they were T-shirts from L.L.Bean. A yellow 
　　sticky on this pair of Fendi pencil pants, another placed squarely 
　　over the Chanel skirt suit, a third with a big “NO” plastered across 
　　the matching silk top. Flip, stick, flip, stick, on and on it went, 
　　until she had selected a full season’s wardrobe directly from the 
　　runway, clothes that had most likely not yet even been made.

　　I’d watched as Emily had faxed Miranda’s choices to the different 
　　designers, omitting any size or color preference, since anyone worth 
　　their Manolos knew what would work for Miranda Priestly. Of course, 
　　merely being made to the correct size wasn’t enough―when the clothes 
　　did arrive at the magazine, they’d need to be cut and tucked to make 
　　them appear custom-made. Only when the entire wardrobe was 
　　completely ordered, shipped, snipped, and delivered expressly to her 
　　bedroom closet by chauffeured limousine would Miranda relinquish 
　　last season’s clothes and heaps of Yves and Celine and Helmut Lang 
　　would find their way―in garbage bags―back to the office. Most were 
　　only four or six months old, stuff that had been worn once or twice 
　　or, most often, not at all. Everything was still so incredibly 
　　stylish, so ludicrously hip, that it wasn’t yet available in most 
　　stores, but once it was last season, it was about as likely to show 
　　up on Miranda as a pair of pleather pants from Target’s new Massimo 
　　line.

　　Occasionally I’d find a tank top or an oversize jacket I could keep, 
　　but the fact that everything was in a size zero was a bit of a 
　　problem. Mostly we distributed the clothes to anyone with preteen 
　　daughters, the only ones who had a shot in hell of actually fitting 
　　into the stuff. I pictured little girls with bodies like little boys 
　　strutting around in Prada lipstick skirts and slinky Dolce and 
　　Gabbana dresses with spaghetti straps. If there was something really 
　　dynamite, really expensive, I’d pull it from the garbage bag and 
　　stash it under my desk until I could smuggle it Home safely. A few 
　　quick clicks on ebay or perhaps a little visit to one of the upscale 
　　consignment shops on Madison Avenue, and my salary all of a sudden 
　　wasn’t so depressing. Not stealing, I rationalized, simply utilizing 
　　what was available to me.

　　Miranda called six more times between the hours of six and nine in 
　　the evening―midnight to threeA .M. her time―to have us connect her 
　　to various people who were already in Paris. I fielded them 
　　listlessly, uneventfully, until I went to gather my things and try 
　　to sneak out for the night before the phone rang again. It wasn’t 
　　until I was climbing exhaustedly into my coat that I caught a 
　　glimpse of the note that I’d stuck to my monitor just so this very 
　　thing wouldn’t happen: CALL A, 3:30P.M. TODAY. My head felt like it 
　　was swimming, my contacts had long before dried to tiny, hard shards 
　　covering my eyes, and at this point my head started to throb. No 
　　sharp pains, just that nebulous, dull kind of ache where you can’t 
　　pinpoint the center but you know it will build and build in a slow, 
　　burning intensity until you either manage to pass out or your head 
　　just explodes. In the frenzy of all the calls that had produced such 
　　anxiety, such panic, from across an ocean, I had forgotten to take 
　　the thirty seconds out of my day and call Alex when he’d asked me 
　　to. Simply up and forgotten to do something so simple for someone 
　　who never seemed to need anything from me.

　　I sat down in the now darkened and silent office and picked up the 
　　phone that was still a little wet from my sweaty hands during 
　　Miranda’s last call a few minutes earlier. His Home line rang and 
　　rang until the machine picked up, but he answered on the first ring 
　　when I tried his Cell Phone.

　　“Hi,” he said, knowing it was me from the caller ID. “How was your 
　　day?”

　　“Whatever, usual. Alex, I’m so sorry I didn’t call you at 
　　three-thirty. I can’t even get into it―it’s just that things were so 
　　crazy here, she just kept calling and―”

　　“Hey, forget it. Not a big deal. Listen, now’s not really a great 
　　time for me. Can I call you tomorrow?” He sounded distracted, his 
　　voice taking on that faraway quality of someone talking from an 
　　international payphone on the beach of a tiny village across the 
　　world.

　　“Um, sure. But is everything OK? Will you just quickly tell me what 
　　you wanted to talk about before? I’ve been really worried that 
　　everything’s not OK.”

　　He was quiet for a moment and then said, “Yeah, well it doesn’t seem 
　　like you were all that worried. I ask you one time to call me at a 
　　time that’s convenient for me―not to mention that your boss isn’t 
　　even in the country right now―and you can’t manage to do that until 
　　six hours after the fact. Not really a sign of someone who’s 
　　genuinely concerned, you know?” He stated all of this with no 
　　sarcasm, no disapproval, just a simple summary of the facts.

　　I was twisting the phone cord around my finger until it cut off the 
　　circulation entirely, making the knuckle bulge out and the tip turn 
　　white; there was also a brief, metallic taste of blood in my mouth, 
　　the first realization that I had been gnawing on the inside of my 
　　bottom lip.

　　“Alex, it’s not that I forgot to call,” I lied openly, trying to 
　　extricate myself from his nonaccusatory accusation. “I simply didn’t 
　　have a single second free, and since it sounded like something 
　　serious, I didn’t want to call just to have to hang up again. I 
　　mean, she must have called me two dozen times just this afternoon, 
　　and each one is an absolute emergency. Emily took off at five and 
　　left me all alone with that phone, and Miranda just didn’t stop. She 
　　just kept calling and calling and calling, and every time I went to 
　　call you, it’d be her again on the other line. I, uh, you know?”

　　My rapid-fire list of excuses sounded pathetic even to me, but I 
　　couldn’t stop. He knew I had just forgotten, and so did I. Not 
　　because I didn’t care or wasn’t concerned, but because all things 
　　non-Miranda somehow ceased to be relevant the moment I arrived at 
　　work. In some ways I still didn’t understand and certainly couldn’t 
　　explain―never mind ask anyone else to understand―how the outside 
　　world just melted into nonexistence, that the only thing remaining 
　　when everything else vanished wasRunway . It was especially 
　　difficult to explain this phenomenon when it was the single thing in 
　　my life I despised. And yet, it was the only one that mattered.

　　“Listen, I have to get back to Joey. He has two friends over and 
　　they’ve probably torn apart the entire house by this point.”

　　“Joey? Does that mean you’re in Larchmont? You don’t usually watch 
　　him on Wednesdays. Is everything OK?” I was hoping to steer him away 
　　from the blatantly obvious fact that I had gotten too wrapped up at 
　　work for six straight hours, and this seemed like the best path. 
　　He’d tell me how his mom had gotten held up at work accidentally or 
　　perhaps had to go see Joey’s teacher for conferences that night when 
　　the regular babysitter canceled. He’d never complain of course―that 
　　just wasn’t his style―but he’d at least tell me what was going on.

　　“Yeah, yeah, everything’s fine. My mom just had an emergency client 
　　meeting tonight. Andy, I can’t really talk about it now. I was just 
　　calling before with some good news. But you didn’t call me back,” he 
　　said flatly.

　　I wrapped the phone cord, which had begun to slowly unravel, so 
　　tight around my pointer and middle fingers that they began to 
　　pulsate. “I’m sorry” was all I could manage, because even though I 
　　knew he was right, that I was insensitive not to have called, I was 
　　too worn out to present a huge defense. “Alex, please. Please don’t 
　　punish me by not telling me something good. Do you know how long 
　　it’s been since anyone has called with good news? Please. Give me 
　　that at least.” I knew he’d respond to my rational approach, and he 
　　did.

　　“Look, it’s not that exciting. I just went ahead and made all the 
　　arrangements for us to go back for our first Homecoming together.”

　　“You did? Really? We’re going?” I’d brought it up a couple times 
　　before in what I’d liked to believe had been an offhand and casual 
　　way, but in a decidedly non-Alex fashion he’d been hedging on 
　　committing to our going together. It was really early to be planning 
　　any of it, but the hotels and restaurants in Providence were always 
　　full months ahead of time. I’d dropped it a few weeks earlier, 
　　figuring that we would figure something out, find a place to stay 
　　somewhere. But somehow, of course, he’d picked up on just how badly 
　　I wanted to go with him, and he’d figured out everything.

　　“Yeah, it’s done. We have a rental car―a Jeep, actually―and I 
　　reserved a room at the Biltmore.”

　　“At the Biltmore? You’re kidding? You got a room there? That’s 
　　amazing.”

　　“Yeah, well, you’ve always talked about wanting to stay there, so I 
　　figured we should try it. I even made a reservation for brunch on 
　　Sunday at Al Forno for ten people, so we can each gather up the 
　　troops and have everyone in one place at one time.”

　　“No way. You did all of this already?”

　　“Sure. I thought you’d be really psyched. That’s why I was really 
　　looking forward to telling you about it. But apparently you were too 
　　busy to call back.”

　　“Alex, I’m thrilled. I can’t even tell you how excited I am, and I 
　　can’t believe you figured everything out already. I’m really sorry 
　　about before, but I can’t wait for October. We’re going to have the 
　　best time, thanks to you.”

　　We talked for another couple minutes. By the time I hung up, he 
　　didn’t sound mad anymore, but I could barely move. The effort to win 
　　him back, to find the right words not only to convince him that I 
　　hadn’t overlooked him but also to reassure him that I was 
　　appropriately grateful and enthusiastic had drained the last 
　　reserves of my energy. I don’t remember getting into the car or the 
　　ride Home or whether or not I said hello to John Fisher-Galliano in 
　　the lobby of my building. Besides a bone-deep exhaustion that hurt 
　　so much it almost felt good, the only thing I remember feeling at 
　　all was relief that Lily’s door was shut and no light peeked out 
　　from under it. I thought about ordering in some food, but the mere 
　　thought of locating a menu and a phone was too overwhelming―another 
　　meal that simply wasn’t happening.

　　Instead, I sat on the crumbling concrete of my furnitureless balcony 
　　and leisurely inhaled a cigarette. Lacking the energy to actually 
　　blow the smoke out, I let it seep from my mouth and hang in the 
　　still air around me. At some point I heard Lily’s door open, her 
　　footsteps shuffling along the hallway, but I quickly turned out my 
　　lights and sat in the darkened silence. There had just been fifteen 
　　straight hours of talking, and I could talk no more.

　　13

　　“Hire her,” Miranda had decreed when she met Annabelle, the twelfth 
　　girl I’d interviewed and one of only two that I’d decided were fit 
　　to even meet Miranda. Annabelle was a native French speaker (she 
　　actually spoke so little English I had to have the twins translate 
　　for me), a graduate of the Sorbonne, and the possessor of a long, 
　　hard body, with gorgeous brown hair. She had style. She wasn’t 
　　afraid to wear stilettos on the job and didn’t seem to mind 
　　Miranda’s brusque manner. In fact, she was rather aloof and brusque 
　　herself and never really seemed to make any sort of eye contact. 
　　Always kind of bored, a touch disinterested, and supremely 
　　confident. I was thrilled when Miranda wanted her, both because it 
　　saved me weeks more of meeting nanny wannabes and because it 
　　indicated―in some teeny, tiny way―that I was starting to get it.

　　Get what, exactly, I wasn’t sure, but things were going as smoothly 
　　as I could have hoped at this point. I’d pulled off the clothing 
　　order with only a few noticeable screwups. She hadn’t exactly been 
　　psyched when I’d shown her everything she’d ordered from Givenchy 
　　and accidentally pronounced it precisely as it appears―give-EN-chee. 
　　After much glaring and a few snide comments, I was informed of the 
　　correct pronunciation, and everything went reasonably well until she 
　　had to be told that the Roberto Cavalli dresses she’d requested 
　　hadn’t been made yet and wouldn’t be ready for another three weeks. 
　　But I’d handled that and had managed to coordinate fittings in the 
　　Closet with her tailor and had assembled nearly everything in the 
　　closet in her Home dressing room, a space roughly the size of a 
　　studio apartment.

　　The party planning had continued in Miranda’s absence and picked up 
　　again full-force with her return, but there was surprisingly little 
　　panic―it appeared that everything was in order, and that the 
　　upcoming Friday was set to go off without a hitch. Chanel had 
　　delivered a one-of-a-kind, floor-length red beaded sheath while 
　　Miranda was in Europe, and I’d immediately sent it to the cleaners 
　　for a once-over. I’d seen a similar Chanel dress in black in the 
　　pages ofW the month before, and when I pointed it out to Emily, 
　　she’d nodded somberly.

　　“Forty thousand dollars,” she’d said, moving her head up and down, 
　　up and down. She double-clicked on a pair of black pants onstyle.com 
　　, where she’d spent months scouring for ideas for her upcoming trip 
　　to Europe with Miranda.

　　“Forty thousand WHAT?”

　　“Her dress. The red one from Chanel. It costs forty thousand dollars 
　　if you were to buy it retail. Of course, Miranda isn’t paying full 
　　price, but she didn’t get this one for free, either. Isn’t it wild?”

　　“Forty thousand DOLLARS?” I’d asked again, still unable to believe 
　　that I’d held a single item worth so much money in my hands just 
　　hours earlier. I couldn’t help a quick conceptualization of forty 
　　grand: two full years’ college tuition, a down payment on a new 
　　Home, an averageyearly salary for a typical American family of four. 
　　Or, at the very least, one hell of a lot of Prada bags. But one 
　　dress? I thought I’d seen it all at that point, but I was due 
　　another zinger when the dress came back from the couture dry cleaner 
　　with a calligraphic envelope that readMs. Miranda Priestly . Inside 
　　was a hand-printed invoice on cream-colored cardstock that read:

　　Garment type:Evening gown. Designer:Chanel. Length:Ankle. 
　　Colour:Red. Size:Zero. Description:Hand-beaded, sleeveless with 
　　slight scoop neckline, invisible side zipper, heavy silk lining. 
　　Service:Basic, first-time cleaning. Fee:$670.

　　There was an additional note underneath the actual bill part from 
　　the shop’s owner, a woman I was sure paid both the rent for her 
　　store and her Home with the money she received from Elias on behalf 
　　of Miranda’s extensive dry-cleaning addiction.

　　We were delighted to work on such a gorgeous gown and we hope you 
　　enjoy wearing it to your party at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. As 
　　directed, we will pick up the gown on Monday, May 24, for its 
　　postparty cleaning. Please let us know if we may be of any 
　　additional service. All the best, Colette.

　　Either way, it was only Thursday and Miranda had a brand-new and 
　　newly cleaned gown resting gently in her closet, and Emily had 
　　located the exact silver Jimmy Choo sandals she’d requested. The 
　　hair stylist was due at her house at five-thirtyP .M. on Friday, the 
　　makeup artist at five forty-five, and Uri was on call for exactly 
　　six-fifteen to take Miranda and Mr. Tomlinson to the museum.

　　Miranda had already left for the day to watch Cassidy’s gymnastics 
　　meet, and I was hoping to duck out early to surprise Lily. She’d 
　　just finished her last exam of the year and I wanted to take her out 
　　for a celebration.

　　“Hey, Em, do you think I could leave by six-thirty or seven today? 
　　Miranda said she didn’t need the Book because there really wasn’t 
　　anything new,” I added quickly, irritated that I had to beg my 
　　equal, my peer for permission to leave work after only twelve hours 
　　instead of the usual fourteen.

　　“Um, sure. Yeah, whatever. I’m leaving now.” She checked her 
　　computer screen and saw that it was a little after five. “Stay for 
　　another couple hours and then head out. She’s with the twins 
　　tonight, so I don’t think she should be calling much.” She had a 
　　date that night with the guy she’d met in LA over New Year’s. He’d 
　　finally made it to New York and, surprise of all surprises, he’d 
　　actually called. They were headed to Craftbar for drinks, at which 
　　point she would treat him to Nobu if he was behaving himself. She’d 
　　made the reservations five weeks earlier when he’d e-mailed that he 
　　might be in New York, but Emily still had to use Miranda’s name to 
　　score the time slot.

　　“Well, what are you going to do when you show up there and you’re 
　　clearly not Miranda Priestly?” I asked stupidly.

　　As usual, I received an expert eye-roll-deep-sigh combo. “I’ll 
　　simply tell them that Miranda had to be out of town unexpectedly, 
　　show them a Business card, and tell them she wanted me to have her 
　　reservation. Hardly a big deal.”

　　Miranda called only once after Emily left to tell me that she 
　　wouldn’t be in the office until noon tomorrow, but she’d like a copy 
　　of the restaurant review she’d read today “in the paper.” I had the 
　　presence of mind to ask if she recalled the name of the restaurant 
　　or the paper in which she read about it, but this annoyed her 
　　greatly.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, I’m already late for the meet. Don’t grill me. It was 
　　an Asian fusion restaurant and it was in today’s paper. That’s all.” 
　　And with that, she snapped her Motorola V60 shut. I hoped, as I 
　　usually did when she cut me off midsentence, that one day the Cell 
　　Phone would simply clamp down on her perfectly manicured fingers and 
　　swallow them whole, taking special time to shred those flawless red 
　　nails. No luck yet.

　　I wrote a quick note to myself to find the restaurant first thing in 
　　the morning in the notebook I kept with Miranda’s myriad and 
　　ever-changing requests and bolted for the car. I called Lily from my 
　　cell and she picked up just as I was about to get out and go up to 
　　the apartment, and so I waved to John Fisher-Galliano (who had grown 
　　his hair a little longer and adorned his uniform with a few chains 
　　and looked more like the designer each and every day) but didn’t 
　　move.

　　“Hey, what’s up? It’s me.”

　　“Hiiiiiiiiiii,”she sang, happier than I’d heard her in weeks, maybe 
　　months. “I am so done. Done! No early summer session, nothing but a 
　　little, insignificant proposal due for a master’s thesis that I can 
　　change ten times after the fact if I want. So that leaves nothing 
　　until mid-July. Do you believe it?” She sounded positively gleeful.

　　“I know, I’m so excited for you! You up for a celebratory dinner? 
　　Anywhere you want, it’s onRunway .”

　　“Really? Anywhere?”

　　“Anywhere. I’m downstairs and I have a car. Come down; we’ll go 
　　somewhere great.”

　　She squealed. “Fun! I’ve been meaning to tell you all about Freudian 
　　Boy. He’s beautiful! Hold on one second. I’m putting on jeans and 
　　I’ll be right down.”

　　She bounded out five minutes later looking trendier and happier than 
　　I’d seen her in a very long time. She wore a pair of tight, faded 
　　boot-cut jeans that hugged her hips, paired with a long-sleeve flowy 
　　white peasant blouse. A pair of flip-flops I’d never seen 
　　before―brown leather straps with turquoise beads―completed the look. 
　　She was even wearing makeup, and her curls looked as though they had 
　　seen a blow-dryer at some point in the last twenty-four hours.

　　“You look great,” I said as she bounded into the backseat. “What’s 
　　your secret?”

　　“Freudian Boy, of course. He’s amazing. I think I’m in love. So far, 
　　he’s going strong at nine-tenths. Do you believe it?”

　　“First, let’s decide where we’re going. I didn’t make a reservation 
　　anywhere, but I can call ahead and use Miranda’s name. Anywhere you 
　　want.”

　　She was rubbing on some Kiehl’s lip gloss and staring at herself in 
　　the driver’s rearview mirror. “Anywhere?” she said absentmindedly.

　　“Anywhere. Maybe Chicama for those mojitos?” I suggested, knowing 
　　that the way to sell Lily on a restaurant was by advertising its 
　　drinks, not its food. “Or there are those amazing Cosmos at Meet. Or 
　　the Hudson Hotel―maybe we can even sit outside? If you want wine, 
　　though, I’d love to try―”

　　“Andy, can we go to Benihana? I’ve been craving it forever.” She 
　　looked sheepish.

　　“Benihana? You want to go toBenihana ? Like, the chain restaurant 
　　where they seat you with tourists who have lots of whining children 
　　and unemployed Asian actors cook the food right on your table?That 
　　Benihana?”

　　She was nodding so enthusiastically, I had no choice but to call for 
　　the address.

　　“No, no, I have it right here. Fifty-sixth between Fifth and Sixth, 
　　north side of the street,” she called to the driver.

　　My weirdly excited friend didn’t seem to notice that I was staring. 
　　Instead, she chatted happily about Freudian Boy, aptly named because 
　　he was in his last year of a Ph.D. program in psychology. They’d met 
　　in the graduate student lounge in the basement of Low Library. I got 
　　the full rundown on all of his qualifications: twenty-nine years old 
　　(“So much more mature, but not at all too old”), originally from 
　　Montreal (“Such a cute French accent, but like, totally 
　　Americanized”), longish hair (“But not freaky ponytail long”), and 
　　just the right amount of stubble (“He looks just like Antonio 
　　Banderas when he doesn’t shave for three days”).

　　The samurai chef-actors did their thing, slicing and dicing and 
　　flipping cubes of meat all over the place while Lily laughed and 
　　clapped her hands like a little girl at her first circus. Although 
　　it seemed impossible to believe that Lily actually liked a guy, it 
　　appeared to be the only logical explanation for her obvious elation. 
　　Even more impossible to believe was her claim that she hadn’t slept 
　　with him yet (“Two and a half full weeks of hanging out constantly 
　　at school and nothing! Aren’t you proud of me?”). When I asked why I 
　　hadn’t seen him around the apartment at all, she’d smiled proudly 
　　and said, “He hasn’t been invited over to the apartment yet. We’re 
　　taking things slow.” We were standing directly outside the 
　　restaurant as she regaled me with all the funny stories he’d told 
　　her when Christian Collinsworth appeared in front of me.

　　“Andrea. The lovely Andrea. I have to say, I’m rather surprised to 
　　discover that you’re a fan of Benihana . . . What would Miranda 
　　think?” he asked teasingly, sliding his arm around my shoulder.

　　“I, uh, well . . .” The stammering was immediately all-consuming. 
　　There was no room for words when the thoughts were bouncing off each 
　　side of my head, pinging between my ears.Eating at Benihana. 
　　Christian knows it! Miranda at Benihana! Looks so adorable in 
　　leather bomber jacket! Must be able to smell the Benihana on me! 
　　Don’t kiss him on the cheek! Kiss him on the cheek! “Well, it’s not 
　　that, uh, that . . .”

　　“We were actually just discussing where we would be going next,” 
　　Lily stated crisply, extending her hand to Christian, who, it 
　　finally occurred to me, was alone. “We must’ve gotten so caught up 
　　that we didn’t even realize we’d stopped in the middle of the 
　　street! Hah, hah! How do like that, Andy? My name’s Lily,” she said 
　　to Christian, who shook her hand and then pushed a curl away from 
　　his eye, just like he’d done so many times at the party. Once again 
　　I had an odd feeling that I could be entranced for hours, maybe 
　　days, just watching him push that single, adorable curl away from 
　　his perfect face.

　　I stared at her and at him and became vaguely aware that I had to 
　　say something, but the two of them seemed to be holding up just fine 
　　on their own.

　　“Lily,” Christian rolled the name around on his tongue. “Lily.Great 
　　name. Almost as great asAndrea. ” I had the presence of mind to at 
　　least look at them, and I noticed that Lily was beaming. She was 
　　thinking to herself that this guy was not only older and hot, but he 
　　was also charming. I could see the wheels turning, weighing whether 
　　I was interested in him, if I’d actually do anything because of 
　　Alex, and, if so, if there was anything she could do to expedite it. 
　　She adored Alex because, really, how could you not, but she refused 
　　to understand how two people so young could spend so much time 
　　together―or, at least, that’s what she claimed, although I knew that 
　　it was only the monogamy part that really blew her away. If there 
　　was a speck of a chance of some drama between Christian and me, then 
　　Lily would die fanning the fire.

　　“Lily, it’s a pleasure to meet you. I’m Christian, a friend of 
　　Andrea’s. Do you always stop in front of Benihana to talk?” His 
　　smile actually prompted a shooting-sinking feeling in my stomach.

　　Lily threw back her own brown curls with the back of her hand and 
　　said, “Well of course not, Christian! We just had dinner at Town and 
　　were trying to figure out a good place to get a drink. Any 
　　suggestions?”

　　Town! It was one of the hottest and most expensive restaurants in 
　　the city. Miranda went there. Jessica and her fiancé went there. 
　　Emily talked obsessively about wanting to go there. But Lily?

　　“Well, that’s weird,” Christian said, obviously buying the whole 
　　thing. “I just came from a dinner with my agent there. Strange that 
　　I didn’t see you two . . .”

　　“We were all the way in the back, kind of tucked behind the bar,” I 
　　said quickly, regaining a modicum of composure. Thankfully I’d paid 
　　attention when Emily had made me look at the tiny picture of the 
　　restaurant’s bar listed oncitysearch.com when she was trying to 
　　decide if it was a good date place.

　　“Mmm.” He nodded, looking a little distracted and cuter than ever. 
　　“So, you girls are on your way to get a drink?”

　　I felt an overwhelming need to shower the Benihana stink from my 
　　clothes and hair, but Lily wasn’t giving me a chance. I briefly 
　　wondered if it was as obvious to Christian as it was to me that I 
　　was being whored out, but he was hot and she was determined, so I 
　　kept my mouth shut.

　　“Yep, we were just discussing where to go. Any suggestions? We’d 
　　both just love for you to join us,” Lily declared, tugging on his 
　　arm playfully. “What’s around here that you like?”

　　“Well, midtown isn’t exactly known for its bar scene, but I’m 
　　meeting my agent at Au Bar if you girls would like to come along. He 
　　just ran back to the office to pick up a few papers, but he should 
　　be there in a little. Andy, maybe you’d like to meet him―you never 
　　know when you’re going to need an agent. So, Au Bar, how about it?”

　　Lily was peering at me with an encouraging look, one that 
　　screamed,He’s beautiful, Andy! Beautiful! I may not know who the 
　　hell he is, but he wants you so pull yourself together and tell him 
　　how much you love Au Bar!

　　“I love Au Bar,” I said somewhat convincingly, even though I’d never 
　　been. “I think it’s perfect.”

　　Lily smiled and Christian smiled and together we set off for Au Bar. 
　　Christian Collinsworth and I were going to get a drink together. Did 
　　this qualify as a date?Of course not, don’t be ridiculous, I berated 
　　myself.Alex, Alex, Alex, I silently chanted, both determined to 
　　remember that I had a very loving boyfriend and disappointed with 
　　myself for having to force myself to remember that I had a very 
　　loving boyfriend.

　　Even though it was a random Thursday night, the velvet rope police 
　　were out in full force, and, while they had no problem letting the 
　　three of us in, no one was offering reduced admission of any sort: 
　　twenty bucks just to get in the door.

　　But before I could hand over my cash, Christian deftly peeled three 
　　twenties from a huge wad he pulled from his pocket and handed them 
　　over without a word.

　　I tried to protest, but Christian put two fingers to my lips. 
　　“Darling Andy, don’t worry your pretty little head about it.” And 
　　before I could move my mouth out from underneath his touch, he 
　　reached his other hand behind my head and took my face in both 
　　hands. Somewhere deep in the recesses of my completely addled brain, 
　　the firing synapses were warning me that he was going to kiss me. I 
　　knew it, sensed it, but couldn’t move. He took my split-second 
　　hesitation to move away as permission, leaned over, and touched his 
　　lips to my neck. Just quickly, a brush, really, with perhaps a 
　　little tongue, right underneath my jaw and near my ear but still 
　　firmly on the neck, and then he reached for my hand and pulled me 
　　inside.

　　“Christian, wait! I, uh, I need to tell you something,” I started, 
　　not quite sure whether one uninvited, nonlip, minimal-tongue kiss 
　　really demanded a whole long explanation of having a boyfriend and 
　　not meaning to send the wrong signals. Apparently Christian didn’t 
　　think it was necessary, because he had walked me to a couch in a 
　　dark corner and ordered me to sit. Which I did.

　　“I’m getting us drinks, OK? Don’t worry so much. I don’t bite.” He 
　　laughed, and I felt myself turn red. “Or, if I do, I promise you’ll 
　　enjoy it.” And he turned and walked toward the bar.

　　To keep from passing out or having to actually consider what had 
　　just transpired, I scanned the dark, cavernous room for Lily. We’d 
　　been there less than three minutes, but she was already deep in 
　　conversation with a tall black guy, hanging on his every word and 
　　throwing her head back with delight. I weaved through the throngs of 
　　international drinkers. How did they all know that this was the 
　　place to come if you didn’t have an American passport? I passed a 
　　group of men in their thirties shouting in what I think was 
　　Japanese, two women flapping their hands and talking passionately in 
　　Arabic, and a young, unhappy-looking couple glaring at each other 
　　and whispering angrily in something that sounded like Spanish but 
　　could have been Portuguese. Lily’s guy had his hand on the small of 
　　her back already and was looking utterly charmed. No time for 
　　niceties, I decided. Christian Collinsworth had just massaged my 
　　neck with his mouth. Ignoring the guy, I clamped my hand down on her 
　　right arm and turned to drag her back to the couch.

　　“Andy! Stop it,” she hissed, pulling her arm free but remembering to 
　　smile for her guy. “You’re being rude. I’d like to introduce you to 
　　my friend. William, this is my best friend, Andrea, who doesn’t 
　　usually act like this. Andy, this is William.” She smiled 
　　benevolently as we shook hands.

　　“So, may I ask why you’re stealing your friend from me, Ahn-dre-ah?” 
　　William asked in a deep voice that almost echoed in the subterranean 
　　space. Perhaps in another place or at another time or with another 
　　person I would’ve noticed his warm smile or the chivalrous way he’d 
　　immediately stood and offered his seat when I approached, but the 
　　only thing I could focus on was that British accent. Didn’t matter 
　　that this was a man, a large black man, who didn’t exactly resemble 
　　Miranda Priestly in any way, shape, or form. Just hearing that 
　　accent, the way he pronounced my namejust like she did, was enough 
　　to literally make my heart beat a little faster.

　　“William, I’m sorry, it’s nothing personal. It’s just that I have a 
　　little problem and I’d like to talk to Lily in private. I’ll bring 
　　her right back.” And with that, I grabbed her arm more firmly this 
　　time and yanked. Enough of this shit: I needed my friend.

　　Once we’d settled into the couch where Christian had placed me and I 
　　checked to ensure he was still trying to get the bartender’s 
　　attention (straight guy at the bar―he may be there all night), I 
　　took a deep breath.

　　“Christian kissed me.”

　　“So what’s the problem? Was he a bad kisser? Oh, that’s it, isn’t 
　　it? No quicker way to ruin a good fraction than―”

　　“Lily! Good, bad, what’s the difference?”

　　Her eyebrows reached up her forehead and she opened her mouth to 
　　talk, but I kept going.

　　“And not that it’s at all relevant, but he kissed my neck. The 
　　problem is nothow he did, it’s that it happened at all in the first 
　　place. What about Alex? I don’t exactly go around kissing other 
　　guys, you know.”

　　“Don’t I ever,” she mumbled under her breath before speaking up. 
　　“Andy, you’re being ridiculous. You love Alex and he loves you, but 
　　it’s perfectly okay if you feel like kissing another guy once in a 
　　while. You’re twenty-three years old, for chrissake. Cut yourself a 
　　little slack!”

　　“But I didn’t kiss him . . . He kissed me!”

　　“First of all, let’s get something very clear. Remember when Monica 
　　went down on Bill and the whole country and all our parents and Ken 
　　Starr rushed to call that sex? That was not sex. In much the same 
　　way, some guy who probably means to kiss your cheek but gets your 
　　neck instead does not qualify as ‘kissing someone.’ ”

　　“But―”

　　“Shut up and let me finish. More important than what actually 
　　happened is that you wanted it to happen. Just admit it, Andy. You 
　　wanted to kiss Christian regardless of whether that’s ‘wrong’ or 
　　‘bad’ or ‘against the rules.’ And if you don’t admit it, you’re 
　　lying.”

　　“Lily, seriously, I don’t think it’s fair that―”

　　“I’ve known you for nine years, Andy. You don’t think I can see it 
　　written all over your face that you worship him? You know you 
　　shouldn’t―he doesn’t quite play by your rules, does he? But that’s 
　　probably exactly why you like him. Just go with it, enjoy it. If 
　　Alex is right for you, he’ll always be right for you. And now, 
　　you’ll have to excuse me, because I have found someone who’s right 
　　for me . . . for right now.” She literally jumped off the couch and 
　　skipped back to William, who looked undeniably happy to see her.

　　I felt self-conscious sitting on the oversize velvet couch alone and 
　　looked around to find Christian, but he wasn’t at the bar anymore. 
　　It would just take a little more time, I decided. Everything would 
　　just sort itself out if I just stopped worrying so much. Maybe Lily 
　　was right and I did like Christian―what was so wrong with that? He’s 
　　smart and undeniably gorgeous, and the whole take-charge confidence 
　　thing was incredibly sexy. Hanging out with someone who just 
　　happened to be sexy didn’t exactly translate as cheating. I’m sure 
　　there had been situations over the years in which Alex had worked 
　　with or studied with or gotten to know a cool, attractive girl, and 
　　he may have had thoughts. Did that make him disloyal? Of course not. 
　　With renewed confidence (and a now-desperate attempt to see, watch, 
　　hear, just be near Christian again), I began cruising the lounge.

　　I found him leaning on his right hand, talking intently to an older 
　　man, probably in his late forties, who was wearing a very dapper 
　　three-piece suit. Christian was gesturing wildly, hands flailing, 
　　with a look on his face that registered somewhere between amused and 
　　supremely annoyed, while the man with salt-and-pepper hair looked at 
　　him earnestly. I was still too far away to hear what they were 
　　discussing, but I must have been staring rather intently, because 
　　the man’s eyes locked on mine and he smiled. Christian pulled back a 
　　little, followed his gaze, and saw me watching them both.

　　“Andy, darling,” he said, his tone entirely different from what it 
　　had been just a few minutes earlier. I noticed he made the 
　　transition from seducer to friend of your parent quite smoothly. 
　　“Come here, I’d like you to meet a friend of mine. This is Gabriel 
　　Brooks, my agent, Business manager, and all-around hero. Gabriel, 
　　this is Andrea Sachs, currently ofRunway magazine.”

　　“Andrea, a pleasure to meet you,” Gabriel said, extending a hand and 
　　taking mine in one of those annoyingly delicate 
　　I’m-not-shaking-your-hand-as-I-would-a-man’s-because-I’m-sure-I’d-just-snap-your-girly-little-bones-in-half 
　　clutches. “Christian has told me a lot about you.”

　　“Really?” I said, pressing a bit more firmly, which only caused him 
　　to loosen his already slack grip. “All good, I hope?”

　　“Of course. He said you’re an aspiring writer, like our mutual 
　　friend here.” He smiled.

　　I was surprised to hear that he actually had heard about me from 
　　Christian, since our conversation about writing had sounded like 
　　just small talk. “Yes, well, I love to write, so hopefully someday . 
　　. .”

　　“Well, if you’re half as good as some of the other people he’s sent 
　　my way, then I look forward to reading your work.” He dug around in 
　　an inside pocket and produced a leather case, from which he drew out 
　　a Business card. “I know you’re not ready yet, but when it does come 
　　time to show your stuff to someone, I hope you’ll keep me in mind.”

　　It took every ounce of willpower and strength to remain standing 
　　upright, to make sure that my mouth had not flopped open or my knees 
　　had not just given out.Hope you’ll keep me in mind? The man who 
　　represented Christian Collinsworth, literary boy genius 
　　extraordinaire, had just asked if I would keep him in mind. This was 
　　craziness.

　　“Why thank you,” I croaked, tucking the card into my bag, from where 
　　I knew I would pull it out and examine every inch of it the first 
　　chance I got. They both smiled at me, and it took a minute for me to 
　　recognize this as my cue to leave. “Well, Mr. Brooks, um, Gabriel, 
　　it was really great meeting you. I’ve got to be getting Home now, 
　　but hopefully we’ll cross paths soon.”

　　“My pleasure, Andrea. Congratulations again on scoring such a 
　　fantastic job. Right out of college and working atRunway . Very 
　　impressive.”

　　“I’ll walk you out,” Christian said, placing a hand on my elbow and 
　　motioning to Gabriel that he’d be right back.

　　We stopped at the bar so I could tell Lily that I was heading Home, 
　　and she unnecessarily told me―in between William’s nuzzlings―that 
　　she wouldn’t be joining me. At the foot of the stairs that would 
　　take me back to street level, Christian kissed me on the cheek.

　　“Great running into you tonight. And I have a feeling I’m going to 
　　have to hear Gabriel talk about how great you are now, too.” He 
　　grinned.

　　“We barely exchanged two words,” I pointed out, wondering why 
　　everyone was being so complimentary.

　　“Yes, Andy, but what you don’t seem to realize is that the writing 
　　world is a small one. Whether you write mysteries or feature stories 
　　or newspaper articles, everyone knows everyone. Gabriel doesn’t have 
　　to know much about you to know that you have potential: you were 
　　good enough to get a job atRunway, you sound bright and articulate 
　　when you talk, and hell, you’re a friend of mine. He’s got nothing 
　　to lose by giving you his card. What does he know? He could have 
　　just discovered the next best-selling author. And trust me―Gabriel 
　　Brooks is a good man for you to know.”

　　“Hmm, I guess you’re right. Well, anyway, I’ve got to get Home since 
　　I’ve got to be at work again in a few hours anyway. Thanks for 
　　everything. I really appreciate it.” I leaned up to kiss him on the 
　　cheek, half expecting him to turn his face forward and half wanting 
　　him to, but he just smiled.

　　“More than my pleasure, Andrea Sachs. Have a good night.” And before 
　　I could come up with anything remotely clever to say, he was headed 
　　back to Gabriel.

　　I rolled my eyes at myself and headed to the street to hail a cab. 
　　It had started to rain―nothing torrential, just a light, steady 
　　stream―so of course there wasn’t a single cab free anywhere in 
　　Manhattan. I called the Elias-Clark car service, gave them my VIP 
　　number, and had a car screeching to the curb exactly six minutes 
　　later. Alex had left a voice mail asking me how my day was and 
　　saying that he’d be Home all night writing lesson plans. It had been 
　　too long since I surprised him. It was time to make a little effort 
　　and be spontaneous. The driver agreed to wait as long as I needed, 
　　so I ran upstairs, jumped in the shower, took a little extra time 
　　making my hair look good, and threw together a bag with stuff for 
　　work the next day. Since it was already after eleven, traffic was 
　　tame and we made it to Alex’s apartment in Brooklyn in under fifteen 
　　minutes. He looked genuinely happy to see me when he opened the 
　　door, saying over and over and over again how he couldn’t believe 
　　that I’d come all the way to Brooklyn so late on a work night and it 
　　was the best surprise he could’ve hoped for. And as I lay with my 
　　head on my favorite spot on his chest, watching Conan and listening 
　　to the rhythmic sound of his breathing as he played with my hair, I 
　　barely thought about Christian at all.

　　“Um, hi. May I speak with your food editor please? No? OK, maybe an 
　　editorial assistant, or someone who can tell me when a restaurant 
　　review ran?” I asked an openly hostile receptionist at theNew York 
　　Times . She had answered the phone by barking, “What!” and was 
　　currently pretending―or perhaps not―that we didn’t speak a common 
　　language. Persistence paid off, though, and after asking her name 
　　three times (“We can’t tell our names, lady”), threatening to report 
　　her to her manager (“What? You think he cares? I’ll put him on right 
　　now”), and finally swearing rather emphatically that I would 
　　personally show up at their Times Square offices and do everything 
　　in my power to have her fired on the spot (“Oh, really? I’m not so 
　　worried”), she tired of me and connected me to someone else.

　　“Editorial,” snapped another hassled-sounding woman. I wondered if 
　　this is what I sounded like answering Miranda’s phone, and if not, 
　　then I aspired to it. It was such an enormous turnoff hearing a 
　　voice that was so incredibly, undeniably unhappy to hear from you 
　　that it almost made you just want to hang up.

　　“Hi, I just had a quick question.” The words tumbled out in a 
　　desperate attempt to be heard before she inevitably slammed down the 
　　phone. “I’m wondering if you ran any reviews of Asian fusion 
　　restaurants yesterday?”

　　She sighed as though I’d just asked her to donate one of her limbs 
　　to science and then sighed again. “Have you looked online?” Another 
　　sigh.

　　“Yes, yes, of course, but I can’t―”

　　“Because that’s where they would be if we’d done one. I can’t keep 
　　track of every word that goes in the paper, you know.”

　　I took a deep breath myself and tried to stay calm. “Your charming 
　　receptionist connected me to you since you work in the archives 
　　department. So it does in fact appear that it’s your job to keep 
　　track of every word.”

　　“Listen, if I had to try to track down every vague description that 
　　everyone called me with every day, I wouldn’t be able to do anything 
　　else. You really need to check online.” She sighed twice more, and I 
　　began to worry that she might hyperventilate.

　　“No, no,you just listen for a minute,” I started, feeling primed and 
　　ready to lay into this lazy girl who had a far better job than my 
　　own. “I’m calling from Miranda Priestly’s office, and it just so 
　　happens that―”

　　“I’m sorry, did you say you were calling from Miranda Priestly’s 
　　office?” she asked, and I could feel her ears perk up across the 
　　phone line. “Miranda Priestly . . . fromRunway magazine?”

　　“The one and only. Why? Heard of her?”

　　It was here that she transformed from highly put-upon editorial 
　　assistant to gushing fashion slave. “Heard of her? Of course! Is 
　　anybody not familiar with Miranda Priestly? She is, like, the 
　　ultimate woman in fashion. What was it you said she was looking 
　　for?”

　　“A review. Yesterday’s paper. Asian fusion restaurant. I didn’t see 
　　it online, but I’m not sure I checked properly.” That was a bit of a 
　　lie. I had checked online and was quite sure there hadn’t been any 
　　reviews of Asian fusion restaurants in theNew York Times any day in 
　　the past week, but I wasn’t telling her that. Maybe Schizophrenic 
　　Editorial Girl here would work a miracle.

　　So far I’d called theTimes, thePost, and theDaily News, but nothing 
　　had turned up. I’d plugged in her corporate card number to access 
　　theWall Street Journal ’s paid archives and had actually found a 
　　blurb on a new Thai restaurant in the Village, but I had to 
　　immediately discount it when I noticed that the average entrée price 
　　was only seven dollars andcitysearch.com listed only a single dollar 
　　sign next to it.

　　“Well, sure, hold on just a second here. I’m going to check that 
　　right out for you.” And all of a sudden, Little Miss “I Can’t Be 
　　Expected to Remember Every Word That Goes in the Paper” was tapping 
　　away on a keyboard and humming excitedly to both of us.

　　My head ached from the debacle the night before. It had been fun to 
　　surprise Alex and amazingly relaxing to just laze around his 
　　apartment, but for the first time in many, many months, I couldn’t 
　　fall asleep. Over and over and over again, I had pangs of guilt, 
　　flashbacks of Christian kissing my neck and my then jumping in a car 
　　to see Alex but tell him nothing. Even though I tried to push it all 
　　out of my mind, they kept returning, each one more intense than the 
　　last one. When I finally did manage to fall asleep, I dreamed that 
　　Alex was hired to be Miranda’s nanny and―even though in reality hers 
　　didn’t live in―he was to move in with the family. Whenever I wanted 
　　to see Alex in my dream, I would have to share a car Home with 
　　Miranda and visit him in her apartment. She would insist on calling 
　　me Emily and send me out on inane errands even though I told her 
　　repeatedly that I was just there to visit my boyfriend. By the time 
　　morning had finally rolled around, Alex had fallen under Miranda’s 
　　spell and couldn’t understand why I thought she was so evil and, 
　　even worse, Miranda had started dating Christian. Blessedly, my hell 
　　ended when I woke in a start after dreaming that Miranda, Christian, 
　　and Alex all sat around in Frette robes together each Sunday morning 
　　and read theTimes and laughed while I prepared breakfast, served 
　　everyone, and cleaned up afterward. Sleep last night was about as 
　　relaxing as a solo stroll down Avenue D at four in the morning, and 
　　now this restaurant review was wrecking whatever hope I had of 
　　having an easy Friday.

　　“Hmm, no, we really haven’t run anything lately on Asian fusion. I’m 
　　trying to think, just personally, you know, if there are any new hot 
　　Asian fusion places. You know, places that Miranda would actually 
　　consider going?” she said, sounding like she’d do anything to 
　　prolong the conversation.

　　I ignored her transition into first-name familiarity with Miranda 
　　and worked on getting her off the phone. “OK, well, that’s what I 
　　thought. Thanks anyway, though. I appreciate it. ’Bye.”

　　“Wait!” she cried out, and even though the phone was already halfway 
　　to the base, her urgency made me listen again. “Yes?”

　　“Oh, well, I, uh, I just wanted to let you know that if there’s, 
　　like, anything else I can do―or any of us here―feel free to call, 
　　you know? We love Miranda here, and we’d, like, uh, want to help 
　　with anything we could?”

　　You would’ve thought that the First Lady of the United States of 
　　America had just asked Schizophrenic Editorial Girl if she might be 
　　able to locate an article for the president, an article that 
　　included information crucial to an imminent war, and not an unnamed 
　　review on an unnamed restaurant in an unnamed newspaper. The saddest 
　　part of all was that I wasn’t surprised: I knew she’d come around.

　　“OK, I’ll be sure to pass that along. Thanks so much.”

　　Emily looked up from preparing yet another expense account and said, 
　　“No luck there either?”

　　“Nope. I have no idea what she’s talking about, and apparently, 
　　neither does anyone else in this city. I’ve spoken to someone at 
　　every Manhattan paper she reads, checked online, talked to 
　　archivists, food writers, chefs. Not a single person can think of a 
　　suitable Asian fusion place that has so much as been open in the 
　　past week, never even mind one that’s been reviewed in the past 
　　twenty-four hours. She’s clearly lost her mind. So what now?” I 
　　flopped back into my chair and pulled my hair into a ponytail. It 
　　still wasn’t yet nine in the morning, and already the headache had 
　　spread to my neck and shoulders.

　　“I guess,” she said slowly, regrettably, “you have no choice but to 
　　ask her to clarify.”

　　“Oh, no, not that! However will she react?”

　　Emily, as usual, didn’t appreciate my sarcasm. “She’ll be in at 
　　noon. If I were you, I’d figure out what you are going to say ahead 
　　of time, because she is not going to be happy if you don’t have that 
　　review. Especially since she asked for it last night,” she pointed 
　　out with a barely suppressed smile. She was clearly delighted that I 
　　was about to get abused.

　　There was little left to do but wait. It was my luck that Miranda 
　　was at her monthly marathon shrink session (“She just doesn’t have 
　　time to go all the way over there once a week,” Emily had explained 
　　when I asked why she went for three straight hours), the only chunk 
　　of time during the entire day or night when she wouldn’t call us 
　　and, of course, the only time I needed her to. A mountain of mail 
　　that I’d neglected to open for the past two days threatened to 
　　topple off the desk, and another two full days’ worth of dirty dry 
　　cleaning was heaped under it, around my feet. Huge sigh to let the 
　　world know just how unhappy I was, and I dialed the cleaners.

　　“Hi, Mario. It’s me. Yeah, I know―two whole days, no talk. Can I get 
　　a pickup, please? Great. Thanks.” I hung up the phone and forced 
　　myself to pull some of the clothes onto my lap, where I would sort 
　　through them and record them on the computerized list I kept of her 
　　outgoing clothes. When Miranda called the office at 9:45P .M. and 
　　demanded to know where her new Chanel suit was, all I had to do was 
　　open up the document and tell her that they’d gone out the day 
　　before and were due to be delivered the following day. I logged 
　　today’s clothes in (one Missoni blouse, two identical pairs of 
　　Alberta Ferretti pants, two Jil Sander sweaters, two white Hermès 
　　scarves, and one Burberry trench coat), threw them in a shopping bag 
　　emblazoned withRunway, and called for a messenger to take them 
　　downstairs to the area where the cleaners would pick them up.

　　I was on a roll! Cleaning was one of the more dreaded tasks, because 
　　no matter how many times I had to do it, I was still repulsed to be 
　　sorting through someone else’s dirty clothes. After I finished 
　　sorting and bagging every day, I had to wash my hands: the lingering 
　　smell of Miranda was all-pervasive, and even though it consisted of 
　　a mixture of Bulgari perfume and moisturizer and occasionally a 
　　whiff of B-DAD’s cigarette smoke and was not at all unpleasant, it 
　　made me feel physically ill. British accents, Bulgari perfume, white 
　　silk scarves―just a few of life’s simpler pleasures that were 
　　forever ruined for me.

　　The mail was the usual, ninety-nine percent garbage that Miranda 
　　would never see. Everything that was just labeled “Editor in Chief” 
　　went directly to the people who edited the Letters pages, but many 
　　of the readers had gotten more savvy and now addressed their 
　　correspondence directly to Miranda. It took me about four seconds to 
　　skim one and see that it was a letter to the editor and not a 
　　charity ball invitation or a quick note from a long-lost friend, and 
　　those I just threw aside. Today there were tons. Breathless notes 
　　from teenage girls and housewives and even a few gay men (or, in all 
　　fairness, maybe straight and just very fashion-conscious): “Miranda 
　　Priestly, you’re not only the darling of the fashion world, you’re 
　　the Queen of my world!” one gushed. “I couldn’t agree more with your 
　　choice to run the article about red being the new black in the April 
　　issue―it was ballsy, but genius!” another exclaimed. A few letters 
　　ranted about a Gucci ad being too sexual since it depicted two women 
　　in stilettos and garters who lay together on a rumpled bed and 
　　pressed their bodies together, and a few more decried the 
　　sunken-eyed, starvation-wracked, heroine-chic models thatRunway had 
　　used in its “health First: How to Feel Better” article. One was a 
　　standard-issue post office postcard that was addressed in flowery 
　　script to Miranda Priestly on one side and read, quite simply, on 
　　the other: “Why? Why do you print such a boring, stupid magazine?” I 
　　laughed out loud and tucked that one in my bag for later―my 
　　collection of critical letters and postcards was growing, and soon 
　　there wasn’t going to be any fridge space left. Lily thought it was 
　　bad karma to bring Home other people’s negative thoughts and 
　　hostility, and she shook her head when I insisted that any bad karma 
　　originally intended toward Miranda could only make me happy.

　　The last letter of the massive pile before I’d begin tackling the 
　　two dozen invitations Miranda received each day was addressed in the 
　　loopy, girly writing of a teenager, complete withi ’s dotted with 
　　hearts and smiley faces next to happy thoughts. I planned to only 
　　skim it, but it wouldn’t allow itself to be skimmed: it was too 
　　immediately sad and honest―it was bleeding and pleading and begging 
　　all over the page. The initial four-second period came and went and 
　　I was still reading.

　　Dear Miranda,

　　My name is Anita and I am seventeen years old and I am a senior at 
　　Barringer H.S. in Newark, NJ. I am so ashamed of my body even though 
　　everyone tells me I’m not fat. I want to look like the models you 
　　have in your magazine. Every month I wait for Runway to come in the 
　　mail even though my mama says it’s stupid to pay all my allowance 
　　for a fashion magazine. But she doesn’t understand that I have a 
　　dream, but you do, dontcha? It has been my dream since I was a 
　　little girl, but I don’t think it’s gonna happen. Why, you ask? My 
　　boobs are very flat and my behind is bigger than the ones your 
　　models have and this makes me very embarased. I ask myself if this 
　　is the way I wanna live my life and I answer NO!!! because I wanna 
　　change and I wanna look and feel better and so I’m asking for your 
　　help. I wanna make a positive change and look in the mirror and love 
　　my breasts and my behind because they look just like the ones in the 
　　best magazine on earth!!!

　　Miranda, I know you’re a wonderful person and fashion editor and you 
　　could transform me into a new person, and trust me, I would be 
　　forever grateful. But if you can’t make me a new person, maybe you 
　　can get me a really, really, really nice dress for special 
　　occasions? I don’t ever have dates, but my mama says it’s OK for 
　　girls to go out alone so I will. I have one old dress but its not a 
　　designer dress or anything you would show in Runway. My favorite 
　　designers are Prada (#1), Versace (#2), John Paul Gotier (#3). I 
　　have many faves, but those are my first three I love. I do not own 
　　any of their clothes and I haven’t even seen them in a store (I’m 
　　not sure if anywhere in Newark sells these designers, but if you 
　　know of one, please tell me so I can go look at them and see what 
　　they look like up close), but I’ve seen there clothes in Runway and 
　　I have to say that I really, really love them.

　　I’m gonna stop bothering you now, but I want you to know that even 
　　if you throw this letter in the garbage, I will still be a big fan 
　　of your magazine because I love the models and the clothes and 
　　everything, and of course I love you too.

　　Sincerely,

　　Anita Alvarez

　　P.S. My phone number is 973-555-3948. You can write or call but 
　　please do so before the week of July 4 because I really need a nice 
　　dress before then. I LOVE YOU!! Thank you!!!!!

　　The letter smelled like Jean Naté, that acrid-smelling toilet waterC 
　　spray preferred by preteen girls the country over. But that wasn’t 
　　what was causing the tightness in my chest, the constriction in my 
　　throat. How many Anitas were there out there? Young girls with so 
　　little else in their lives that they measured their worth, their 
　　confidence, their entire existence around the clothes and the models 
　　they saw inRunway ? How many more had decided to unconditionally 
　　love the woman who put it all together each month―the orchestrator 
　　of such a seductive fantasy―even though she wasn’t worth one single 
　　second of their adoration? How many girls had no idea that the 
　　object of their worship was a lonely, deeply unhappy, and oftentimes 
　　cruel woman who didn’t deserve the briefest moment of their innocent 
　　affection and attention?

　　I wanted to cry, for Anita and all her friends who expended so much 
　　energy trying to mold themselves into Shalom or Stella or Carmen, 
　　trying to impress and please and flatter the woman who would only 
　　take their letters and roll her eyes or shrug her shoulders or toss 
　　them without a second thought to the girl who’d written down a piece 
　　of herself. Instead, I tucked the letter into my top desk drawer and 
　　vowed to find a way to help Anita. She sounded even more desperate 
　　than the others who wrote, and there was no reason that with all the 
　　excess stuff around I couldn’t find her a decent dress for a date 
　　she would hopefully have soon.

　　“Hey, Em, I’m just going to run down to the newsstand and see if 
　　they haveWomen’s Wear yet. I can’t believe it’s so late today. Do 
　　you want anything?”

　　“Will you bring me a Diet Coke?” she asked.

　　“Sure. Just a minute,” I said, and weaved quickly through the racks 
　　and past the doorway to the service elevator, where I could hear 
　　Jessica and James sharing a cigarette and wondering who would be at 
　　Miranda’s Met party that night. Ahmed was finally able to produce a 
　　copy ofWomen’s Wear Daily, which was a relief, and I grabbed a Diet 
　　Coke for Emily and a can of Pepsi for me, but on second thought, I 
　　took a Diet for myself as well. The difference in taste and 
　　enjoyment wasn’t worth the disapproving looks and/or comments I was 
　　sure to receive during the walk from reception to my desk.

　　I was so busy examining the front page’s color photo of Tommy 
　　Hilfiger, I didn’t even notice that one of the elevators had opened 
　　and was available. Out of the corner of my eye, I caught a quick 
　　glimpse of green, a very distinct green. Particularly noteworthy 
　　because Miranda had a Chanel suit in just that shade of greeny 
　　tweed, a color I’d never really seen before but liked a whole lot. 
　　And although my mind knew better, it couldn’t stop my eyes from 
　　looking up and into the elevator, where they were sort of not really 
　　surprised to find Miranda peering back. She stood ramrod straight, 
　　her hair pulled severely off her face as usual, her eyes staring 
　　intently at what must have been my shocked face. There was 
　　absolutely no alternative but to step inside the elevator with her.

　　“Um, good morning, Miranda,” I said, but it came out sounding like a 
　　whisper. The doors closed behind us: we would be the only two riding 
　　for the entire seventeen floors. She said nothing to me, but she 
　　pulled out her leather organizer and began flipping through the 
　　pages. We stood side by side, the depth of the silence increasing 
　　tenfold with every second that she didn’t respond.Does she even 
　　recognize me? I wondered. Was it possible that she was entirely 
　　unaware that I had been her assistant for the past seven months―or 
　　perhaps I really had whispered so softly that she hadn’t heard? I 
　　wondered why she didn’t immediately ask me about the restaurant 
　　review or whether I’d received her message about ordering new china, 
　　or if everything was in place for the evening’s party. But she acted 
　　as though she were all alone in that elevator, that there was not 
　　another human being―or, to be precise, not one worth 
　　acknowledging―inside that small vestibule with her.

　　It wasn’t until nearly a full minute later that I noticed we weren’t 
　　progressing through the floors. Ohmigod! Shehad seen me because 
　　she’d assumed that I would press the button, but I’d been too 
　　stunned to move. I reached forward slowly, fearfully, pressed the 
　　number seventeen, and instinctively waited for something to explode. 
　　But we immediately whisked upward, and I wasn’t even sure if she had 
　　noticed we hadn’t been moving all along.

　　Five, six, seven . . . it felt as though it took ten minutes for the 
　　elevator to pass each floor, and the silence had begun humming in my 
　　ears. When I worked up enough nerve to steal a glance in Miranda’s 
　　direction, I discovered that she was looking me up and down. Her 
　　eyes moved unabashedly as they checked out first my shoes and then 
　　my pants and then my shirt, and continued upward to my face and 
　　hair, all the while avoiding my eyes. The expression on her face was 
　　one of passive disgust, the way the desensitizedLaw & Order 
　　detectives appear when they’re faced with yet another beaten and 
　　bloodied corpse. I did a quick review of myself and wondered what 
　　exactly had triggered the reaction. Short-sleeve, military-style 
　　shirt, a brand-new pair of Seven jeans I’d been sent free from their 
　　PR department simply for working atRunway, and a pair of relatively 
　　flat (two-inch heels) black slingbacks that were to date the only 
　　nonboots/nonsneakers/nonloafers that allowed me to make four-plus 
　　trips to Starbucks a day without shredding my feet to bits. I 
　　usually tried to wear the Jimmy Choos that Jeffy had given me, but I 
　　needed a day off every week or so to allow the arches in my feet to 
　　stop aching. My hair was clean and assembled in the kind of 
　　deliberately messy topknot that Emily always wore without comment, 
　　and my nails―though unpainted―were long and reasonably well shaped. 
　　I had shaved under my arms within the last forty-eight hours. At 
　　least as far as the last time I’d checked, there were no massive 
　　facial eruptions. My Fossil watch was turned around so the face was 
　　sitting on the inside of my wrist just in case anyone tried to catch 
　　a glimpse of the brand, and a quick check with my right hand 
　　indicated that no bra straps were visible. So what was it? What 
　　exactly had made her look at me that way?

　　Twelve, thirteen, fourteen . . . the elevator stopped and swept open 
　　to yet another stark white reception area. A woman of around 
　　thirty-five stepped forward to board, but stopped two feet from the 
　　door when she saw Miranda standing inside.

　　“Oh, I, uh . . .” she stammered loudly, looking frantically around 
　　her for an excuse not to enter our private hell. And although it 
　　would’ve been nicer for me to have her come aboard, I privately 
　　rooted for her to escape. “I, um, oh! I forgot the photos I need for 
　　the meeting,” she finally managed, whipping around on a particularly 
　　unsteady Manolo and high-tailing it back toward the office area. 
　　Miranda hadn’t appeared to notice, and once again, the doors swept 
　　shut.

　　Fifteen, sixteen, and finally―finally!―seventeen, where the doors 
　　opened to reveal a group ofRunway fashion assistants on their way to 
　　pick up the cigarettes, Diet Coke, and mixed greens that would 
　　constitute their lunch. Each young, beautiful face looked more 
　　panicked than the next, and they almost trampled one another trying 
　　to move out of Miranda’s way. They parted directly down the middle, 
　　three to one side and two to the other, and she deigned to walk past 
　　them. They were all staring after her, silent, as she made her way 
　　across the reception area, and I was left with no choice but to 
　　follow her. Wouldn’t notice a thing, I figured. We’d just spent what 
　　felt like an entire insufferable week locked together in a 
　　five-by-three-foot box, and she hadn’t so much as acknowledged my 
　　presence. But as soon as I stepped onto the floor, she turned 
　　around.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah?” she asked, her voice cutting through the tense silence 
　　that filled the entire room. I didn’t respond since I figured it was 
　　rhetorical, but she waited.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah?”

　　“Yes, Miranda?”

　　“Whose shoes are you wearing?” She placed one hand lightly on a 
　　tweed-swathed hip and peered over at me. By now the elevator had 
　　left without the fashion assistants, since they were too engrossed 
　　in actually getting to see―and hear!―Miranda Priestly in the flesh. 
　　I could feel six pairs of eyes on my feet, which, although they had 
　　been quite comfortable mere moments before, were now beginning to 
　　burn and itch under the intense scrutiny of five fashion assistants 
　　and one fashion guru.

　　The anxiety from the unexpected shared elevator ride (a first) and 
　　the unwavering stares of all these people addled my brain, so when 
　　Miranda asked whose shoes I was wearing, I thought that perhapsshe 
　　thought I was not wearing my own.

　　“Um, mine?” I said, without realizing until the words had been 
　　spoken that it sounded not only disrespectful, but downright 
　　obnoxious. The gaggle of Clackers began to twitter, until Miranda 
　　turned her wrath on them.

　　“I’m wondering why the vahst majority of my fashion assistants 
　　appear as though they have nothing better to do than gossip like 
　　little girls.” She began singling them out by pointing at each one, 
　　since she wouldn’t have been able to produce a single one’s name if 
　　you put a gun to her head.

　　“You!” she said crisply to the coltish new girl who was probably 
　　seeing Miranda for the first time. “Did we hire you for this or did 
　　we hire you to call in clothes for the suits shoot?” The girl hung 
　　her head and opened her mouth to apologize, but Miranda barreled on.

　　“And you!” she said, walking over and standing directly in front of 
　　Jocelyn, the highest-ranking among them and a favorite of all the 
　　editors. “You think there aren’t a million girls who want your job 
　　and who understand couture just as well as you?” She took a step 
　　back, slowly moved her eyes up and down each of their bodies, 
　　lingering just long enough to make each feel fat, ugly, and 
　　inappropriately clad, and commanded them all to return to their 
　　desks. They nodded their heads furiously while keeping their heads 
　　bowed. A few murmured heartfelt apologies while they moved quickly 
　　back to the fashion area. It wasn’t until they’d all left that I 
　　realized we were alone. Again.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah? I won’t tolerate being spoken to that way by my 
　　assistant,” she declared, walking toward the door that would lead us 
　　to the hallway. I was unsure whether I should follow her or not, and 
　　I briefly hoped that either Eduardo or Sophy or one of the fashion 
　　girls had warned Emily that Miranda was on her way back.

　　“Miranda, I―”

　　“Enough.” She paused at the door and looked at me. “Whose shoes are 
　　you wearing?” she asked again in a none-too-pleased voice.

　　I checked out my black slingbacks again and wondered how to tell the 
　　most stylish woman in the western hemisphere that I was wearing a 
　　pair of shoes I’d purchased at Ann Taylor Loft. Another glance at 
　　her face and I knew I couldn’t.

　　“I bought them in Spain,” I said quickly, averting my eyes. “It was 
　　at some adorable boutique in Barcelona right off Las Ramblas that 
　　carried this new Spanish designer’s line.” Where the hell had I 
　　pulled that one from?

　　She folded her hand into a fist, put it over her mouth, and cocked 
　　her head. I saw James approaching the glass door from the other 
　　side, but as soon as he saw Miranda he turned and fled. “Ahn-dre-ah, 
　　they’re unacceptable. My girls need to representRunway magazine, and 
　　those shoes are not the message I’m looking to convey. Find some 
　　decent footwear in the Closet. And get me a coffee.” She looked at 
　　me and looked at the door, and I understood I was to reach forward 
　　and open it for her, which I did. She walked through without saying 
　　thank you and headed back to the office. I needed to get money and 
　　my cigarettes for the Coffee run, but neither was worth having to 
　　walk behind her like an abused but loyal duckling, and so I turned 
　　to walk back toward the elevator. Eduardo could spot me the five 
　　bucks for the latte, and Ahmed would just charge a new pack toRunway 
　　’s house account, as he’d been doing for months now. I hadn’t 
　　counted on her even noticing, but her voice hit the back of my head 
　　like a shovel.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah!”

　　“Yes, Miranda?” I stopped in my tracks and turned to face her.

　　“I expect the restaurant review I asked you for is on my desk?”

　　“Um, well, actually, I’ve had a little trouble locating it. You see, 
　　I’ve spoken to all the papers and it seems none of them have run a 
　　review of an Asian fusion restaurant in the past few days. Do you, 
　　uh, happen to remember the name of the restaurant?” Without 
　　realizing it, I was holding my breath and bracing for the onslaught.

　　It appeared my explanation held little interest for her, because she 
　　had resumed walking toward her office. “Ahn-dre-ah, I already told 
　　you that it was in thePost ―is it really that difficult to find?” 
　　And with that, she was gone. ThePost ? I’d spoken to their 
　　restaurant reviewer just that morning and he had sworn there were no 
　　reviews that fit my description―nothing noteworthy had opened that 
　　week whatsoever. She was cracking up, for sure, and I was the one 
　　who was going to get blamed.

　　The Coffee run took only a few minutes since it was midday, so I 
　　felt free to tack on an extra ten minutes to call Alex, who would be 
　　having lunch at exactly twelve-thirty. Thankfully, he answered his 
　　Cell Phone, so I didn’t have to deal with any of the teachers again.

　　“Hey babe, how’s your day going?” He sounded cheerful to the point 
　　of excess, and I had to remind myself not to be irritated.

　　“Awesome so far, as always. I really do love it here. I’ve spent the 
　　past five hours researching an imaginary article that was dreamed up 
　　by a delusional woman who would probably rather take her own life 
　　than admit she’s wrong. What about you?”

　　“Well, I’ve had a great day. Remember I told you about Shauna?” I 
　　nodded into the phone even though he couldn’t see me. Shauna was one 
　　of his little girls who had yet to utter a single word in class, and 
　　whether he threatened her or bribed her or worked with her one on 
　　one, Alex couldn’t get her to talk. He’d been near-hysterical the 
　　first time she’d shown up in his class, placed there by a social 
　　worker who’d discovered that even though she was nine years old 
　　she’d never been in the inside of a school, and he’d been obsessed 
　　with helping her ever since.

　　“Well, it seems she won’t shut up! All it took was a little singing. 
　　I had a folk singer come in today to play the guitar for the kids, 
　　and Shauna was singing away. And once she broke the ice, she’s been 
　　jabbering away with everyone since. She knows English. She has an 
　　age-appropriate vocabulary. She’s completely and totally normal!” 
　　His obvious elation made me smile, and all of a sudden I started to 
　　miss him. Miss him in the way that you do when you’ve seen someone 
　　frequently and regularly but haven’t really connected with him in 
　　any significant way. It had been great to surprise him the night 
　　before, but, as usual, I’d been too frazzled to be much company. We 
　　both inherently understood that we were just waiting out my 
　　sentence, waiting for me to complete my year of servitude, waiting 
　　until everything went back to the way it was. But I still missed 
　　him. And I still felt not a little guilty for the whole Christian 
　　situation.

　　“Hey, congratulations! Not that you needed a testament to the fact 
　　that you’re a great teacher, but you got one anyway! You should be 
　　thrilled.”

　　“Yeah, it’s exciting.” I could hear the bell ring in the background.

　　“Listen, is that offer still open for a date tonight―just you and 
　　me?” I asked, hoping he hadn’t made plans yet but expecting that he 
　　had. As I’d pulled myself out of bed this morning and dragged my 
　　exhausted and sore body into the shower, he’d called out that he 
　　wanted to just rent a movie, order some food, and hang out. I’d 
　　mumbled something unnecessarily sarcastic about it not being worth 
　　his time because I wouldn’t get Home until late and would just fall 
　　asleep, and at least one of us should have a life and enjoy their 
　　Friday night. I wanted to tell him now that I was angry at Miranda, 
　　atRunway, at myself, but not at him, and that there was nothing I’d 
　　rather do than curl up on the couch and cuddle for fifteen straight 
　　hours.

　　“Sure.” He sounded surprised, but pleased. “Why don’t I just wait at 
　　your place and then we can figure out what we want to do? I’ll just 
　　hang out with Lily until you get Home.”

　　“Sounds absolutely perfect. You can hear all about Freudian Boy.”

　　“Who?”

　　“Never mind. Listen, I’ve got to run. The Queen will wait for Coffee 
　　no longer. See you tonight―can’t wait.”

　　Eduardo allowed me upstairs after chanting only two refrains―my 
　　choice―of “We Didn’t Start the Fire,” and Miranda was talking 
　　animatedly when I set down her Coffee spread on the left-hand corner 
　　of her desk. I spent the rest of the afternoon arguing with every 
　　assistant and editor I could reach at theNew York Post, trying to 
　　insist that I knew their paper better than they did, and could I 
　　please just have one little copy of the Asian fusion restaurant 
　　review they’d run the day before?

　　“Ma’am, I’ve told you a dozen times and I’ll tell you again:we did 
　　not review any such restaurant . I know Ms. Priestly is a crazy 
　　woman and I don’t doubt that she’s making your life a living hell, 
　　but I just can’t produce an article that doesn’t exist. Do you 
　　understand?” This had come finally from an associate who, even 
　　though he worked onPage Six, had been assigned the task of finding 
　　my article to shut me up. He’d been patient and willing, but he’d 
　　reached the end of his charity work. Emily was on the other line 
　　with one of their freelance food writers, and I’d forced James to 
　　call one of his ex-boyfriends who worked in the advertising 
　　department there to see if there was anything―anything―he could do. 
　　It was already three o’clock the dayafter she’d requested something, 
　　and this was the very first time I hadn’t gotten it immediately.

　　“Emily!” Miranda called from inside her deceptively bright office.

　　“Yes, Miranda?” we both answered, jumping up to see which one of us 
　　she would motion to.

　　“Emily, I can hear that you just spoke to the people at thePost ?” 
　　she said, directing her attention in my direction. The real Emily 
　　looked relieved and sat down.

　　“Yes, Miranda, I just hung up with them. I’ve actually spoken to 
　　three different people there and all of them insist that they 
　　haven’t reviewed a single new Asian fusion restaurant in Manhattan 
　　at any point in the last week. Maybe it was before then?” I was now 
　　tottering in front of her desk with my head bowed just enough so I 
　　could stare at the black Jimmy Choo slingbacks with four-inch heels 
　　that Jeffy had provided so smugly.

　　“Manhattan?” She looked confused and pissed off all at once. “Who 
　　said anything about Manhattan?”

　　It was my time to be confused.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, I’ve told you at least five times now that the review 
　　was written about a new restaurant inWashington . Since I’ll be 
　　there next week, I need you to make a reservation.” She cocked her 
　　head and moved her lips into what can only be described as a wicked 
　　smile. “What exactly about this project do you find so challenging?”

　　Washington? Five times she’d told me the restaurant was inWashington 
　　? I don’t think so. She was clearly losing her mind or just taking 
　　sadistic pleasure in watching me lose mine. But being the idiot she 
　　took me for, I again spoke without thinking.

　　“Oh, Miranda, I’m fairly certain that theNew York Post doesn’t do 
　　reviews of restaurants in Washington. It appears they only actually 
　　visit and review places new to New York.”

　　“Is that supposed to be funny, Ahn-dre-ah? Is that your idea of 
　　having a sense of humor?” Her smile had disappeared and she was 
　　leaning forward in her seat, looking like a hungry vulture that was 
　　impatiently circling its prey.

　　“Um no, Miranda, I just thought that―”

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, as I’ve made clear adozen times already, the review I’m 
　　looking for is in theWashington Post . You’ve heard of that little 
　　newspaper, right? Just like New York has theNew York Times, 
　　Washington, D.C., has its own paper, too. See how that works?” Her 
　　voice was now beyond mocking: she was so incredibly patronizing that 
　　she was only one step away from actually addressing me in baby talk.

　　“I’ll get it for you right away,” I stated as calmly as I could and 
　　quietly walked out.

　　“Oh, and Ahn-dre-ah?” My heart lurched and my stomach wondered if it 
　　could take another “surprise.” “I expect you to attend the party 
　　tonight to greet the guests. That’s all.”

　　I looked to Emily, who looked absolutely baffled, her crinkled 
　　forehead making her appear as dumbfounded as I felt. “Did I hear her 
　　correctly?” I whispered to Emily, who could do nothing but nod and 
　　motion for me to come to her side of the suite.

　　“I was afraid of this,” she whispered gravely, like a surgeon 
　　telling a patient’s family member that they’d found something 
　　horrible upon opening the chest cavity.

　　“She can’t be serious. It’s four o’clock on Friday. The party starts 
　　at seven. It’s black tie, for chrissake―there is no way on earth she 
　　expects me to go.” I looked again at my watch in disbelief and tried 
　　to remember her exact words.

　　“Oh, she’s quite serious,” she said, picking up the phone. “I’ll 
　　help you, OK? You go find the review in theWashington Post and get 
　　her a copy before she leaves―Uri is coming for her soon to take her 
　　Home for her hair and makeup. I’ll get you a dress and everything 
　　else you need for tonight. Don’t worry. We’ll figure it out.” She 
　　began rapid-fire dialing and whispering urgent-sounding instructions 
　　into the phone. I stood and stared, but she waved her hand without 
　　looking up and I snapped back to reality.

　　“Go,” she whispered, looking at me with a rare hint of sympathy. And 
　　I went.


　　14

　　“You can’t show up in a cab,” Lily said to me as I jabbed helplessly 
　　at my eyes with my brand-new Maybelline Great Lash mascara. “This is 
　　black-tie. Call a car, for chrissake.” She watched for a minute more 
　　and then grabbed the clumpy wand from my hand and tapped my eyelids 
　　closed.

　　“I guess you’re right,” I sighed, still refusing to accept that my 
　　Friday night was to be spent in a formal gown at the Met, greeting 
　　wealthy-but-still-rednecks from Georgia and North and South Carolina 
　　and plastering fake smile after fake smile on my poorly made-up 
　　face. The announcement had left me all of three hours to find a 
　　dress, buy makeup, get ready, and revamp all my weekend plans, and 
　　in the craziness of the situation, I’d forgotten to arrange 
　　transportation.

　　Luckily, working at one of the biggest fashion magazines in the 
　　country (the job a million girls would die for!) has its advantages, 
　　and by 4:40P .M. I was the proud borrower of a knockout floor-length 
　　black Oscar de la Renta number, provided kindly by Jeffy, Closet 
　　maven and lover of all things feminine (“Girl, you go black-tie, you 
　　go Oscar, and that’s that. Now don’t be shy, take those pants off 
　　and try this on for Jeffy.” I began to unbutton and he shuddered. I 
　　asked him if he really found my half-naked body that repulsive, and 
　　he said of course not; it was merely my panty lines that he found so 
　　disgusting). The fashion assistants had already called in a pair of 
　　silver Manolos in my size, and someone in accessories had selected a 
　　flashy silver Judith Leiber evening bag with a long, clanking chain. 
　　I’d expressed interest in an understated Calvin Klein clutch, but 
　　she snorted at the suggestion and handed me the Judith. Stef was 
　　debating whether I should wear a choker or a pendant, and Allison, 
　　the newly promoted beauty editor, was on the phone with her 
　　manicurist, who made office calls.

　　“She’ll meet you in the conference room at four forty-five,” Allison 
　　said when I picked up my extension. “You’re wearing black, right? 
　　Insist on Chanel Ruby Red. Just tell her to bill us.”

　　The entire office had worked itself up to a nearly hysterical frenzy 
　　trying to make me look appropriate for the night’s gala affair. It 
　　certainly wasn’t because they all adored me so much and killed 
　　themselves trying to help me out; rather, they knew Miranda had 
　　mandated the makeover and were eager to prove to her the high level 
　　of their taste and class.

　　Lily finished her charity makeup lesson and I briefly wondered if I 
　　looked ridiculous wearing a floor-length Oscar de la Renta gown and 
　　Bonne Belle Lipsmackers in Fudgsicle. Probably, but I had turned 
　　down all offers of having a makeup artist come to the apartment. 
　　Everyone on staff tried to insist―and none too subtly―but I 
　　adamantly refused. Even I had limits.

　　I hobbled into the bedroom on my four-inch Manolo stilettos and 
　　kissed Alex on the forehead. He barely looked up from the magazine 
　　he was reading.

　　“I’ll definitely be home by eleven, so we can go get some dinner or 
　　drinks then, OK? I’m sorry I have to do this, I really am. If you do 
　　decide to go out with the guys, call so I can come meet you, OK?” He 
　　had, as promised, come directly from school to spend the night 
　　together, and hadn’t been all that thrilled when I’d arrived home 
　　with the news that he could definitely have a relaxing night at Home 
　　but that I wouldn’t be a part of the plans. He was sitting on the 
　　balcony off my bedroom, reading an old copy ofVanity Fair we had 
　　lying around and drinking one of the beers Lily kept in the fridge 
　　for guests. It wasn’t until after I’d explained that I had to work 
　　tonight that I even noticed he and Lily weren’t hanging out.

　　“Where is she?” I asked. “She has no classes, and I know she’s not 
　　working Fridays all summer.”

　　Alex took a swig of his Pale Ale and shrugged. “I’m guessing she’s 
　　here. Her door’s closed, but I saw some guy walking around before.”

　　“Some guy? Could you be a little more descriptive? What guy?” I 
　　wondered if someone had broken in, or perhaps Freudian Boy had 
　　finally been invited over.

　　“I don’t know, but he’s scary-looking. Tattoos, piercings, 
　　wife-beater―the whole nine. Can’t imagine where she met this one.” 
　　He took another nonchalant swig.

　　Icouldn’t imagine where she’d found him, either, considering I’d 
　　left her at eleven the night before in the company of a very polite 
　　guy named William who, as far as I could see, was not a 
　　wife-beater-wearing, tattoo-donning kind of guy.

　　“Alex, seriously! You’re telling me there’s some thug cruising 
　　around my apartment―a thug who may or may not have been invited 
　　over―and you don’t care? This is ridiculous! We need to do 
　　something,” I said, getting up from the chair and wondering, as 
　　always, if the weight shift was going to cause the balcony to fall 
　　off the side of the building.

　　“Andy, relax. He’s definitelynot a thug.” He flipped a page. “He 
　　might be a punk-grunge-freak, but he’s not a thug.”

　　“Great, that’s just fucking great. Now are you going to come see 
　　what’s going on, or are you just going to sit there all night?”

　　He still refused to look at me, and I finally understood how annoyed 
　　he was about tonight. Understandable, entirely, but I was just as 
　　irritated to have to work, and there wasn’t a damn thing I could do 
　　about it. “Why don’t you call if you need me?”

　　“Fine,” I huffed and made a big production of storming inside. 
　　“Don’t feel guilty when you find my dismembered body on the bathroom 
　　floor. Really, no big deal . . .”

　　I stomped inside and around the apartment for a little while, 
　　looking for evidence of this guy’s presence. The only thing that 
　　seemed at all out of place was an empty bottle of Ketel One in the 
　　sink. Had she really managed to buy, open, and drink an entire 
　　bottle of vodka sometime after midnight last night? I knocked on her 
　　door. No response. I knocked a little more insistently, and I heard 
　　a guy’s voice state the very obvious fact that someone was knocking 
　　on the door. When still no one responded, I turned the doorknob.

　　“Hello? Anyone Home here?” I called out, trying not to look inside 
　　the room but only being able to hold out for about five seconds. My 
　　eyes skipped over the two pairs of jeans that were tangled up on the 
　　floor and the bra that was hanging from the desk chair and the 
　　overflowing ashtray that made the room stink like a frat house and 
　　went directly to the bed, where my best friend was stretched out on 
　　her side, back to me, completely naked. A sickly looking guy with a 
　　line of sweat above his lip and a head full of greasy hair blended 
　　into her sheets: his dozens of snaking, winding, scary tattoos acted 
　　as the perfect camouflage against her green and blue plaid 
　　comforter. There was a gold hoop through his eyebrow, much 
　　glittering metal from each ear, and two small, rounded spikes coming 
　　out of his chin. Thankfully he was wearing a pair of boxers, but 
　　they looked so dirty and dingy and old that I almost―almost―wished 
　　he weren’t. He pulled on his cigarette, exhaled slowly and 
　　meaningfully, and nodded in my general direction.

　　“Yo,” he said, waving his cigarette toward me. “You mind shuttin’ 
　　the door there, m’friend?”

　　What? “M’friend”? Was this sleazy-looking Aussie actually givingme 
　　attitude?

　　“Are you smokingcrack ?” I asked, no longer interested in manners of 
　　any sort, and not at all scared. He was shorter than me and couldn’t 
　　have weighed more than a hundred thirty―as far as I could tell, the 
　　worst thing he could do to me at that point would be to touch me. I 
　　shuddered when I thought about the myriad ways he’d probably touched 
　　Lily, who was still sleeping soundly underneath his protective 
　　hover. “Who the hell do you think you are? This ismy apartment, and 
　　I’d like you to leave. Now!” I added, my courage fueled by the time 
　　demands: I had exactly one hour to get gorgeous for the single most 
　　stressful night of my career, and dealing with this strung-out freak 
　　had not been part of the game plan.

　　“Duuuuuuuude. Chill out,” he breathed and inhaled again. “It doesn’t 
　　look like your friend here wants me to leave . . .”

　　“She would want you to leave if she HAPPENED TO BE CONSCIOUS, YOU 
　　ASSHOLE!” I screamed, horrified that Lily had―in all likelihood―had 
　　sex with this guy. “I assure you, I speak for both of us when I say 
　　GET THE FUCK OUT OF OUR APARTMENT!”

　　I felt a hand on my shoulder and whipped around to see Alex, looking 
　　concerned, checking out the situation. “Andy, why don’t you get in 
　　the shower and let me take care of this, OK?” Although no one could 
　　call him a big guy, he looked like a pro wrestler compared to the 
　　emaciated mess that was currently nuzzling his facial metal against 
　　my best friend’s bare back.

　　“I. WANT. HIM.”―I pointed here, just to be clear.―“OUT. OF. MY. 
　　APARTMENT.”

　　“I know you do, and I think he’s about ready to leave, too, aren’t 
　　you, buddy?” Alex asked in the kind of soothing voice you’d use with 
　　a rabid-looking dog you were frightened of upsetting.

　　“Duuuuuuude,no issues here. Just havin’ a little fun with Lily is 
　　all. She was all over me last night at Au Bar―ask anyone, they’ll 
　　tell you. Fuckin’ begged me to come back with her.”

　　“I don’t doubt that,” Alex said soothingly. “She’s a really friendly 
　　girl when she wants to be, but sometimes she gets too drunk to know 
　　what she’s doing. So as her friend, I’m going to have to ask you to 
　　leave now.”

　　The freak mashed his cigarette out and made a big show of throwing 
　　up his hands in mock surrender. “Dude, no problem whatsoever. I’ll 
　　just take a quick shower and give m’little Lily here a proper 
　　good-bye, and then I’ll be on m’way.” He swung his legs over the 
　　side of the bed and reached for the towel that hung next to her 
　　desk.

　　Alex moved forward, swiftly removed the towel from his hands, and 
　　looked him directly in the eye. “No. I think you should leave now. 
　　Right now.” And in a way that I’d never seen him do in the almost 
　　three years I’d known him, he placed himself squarely in front of 
　　Freak Boy and allowed his height to insinuate the threat that was 
　　clearly intended.

　　“Dude, no worries. I’m outta here,” he crooned after taking one look 
　　at Alex and realizing he had to crane his neck to look at his face. 
　　“Just get m’self dressed and out the door.” He picked up his jeans 
　　from the floor and located his ripped-up T-shirt from underneath 
　　Lily’s still exposed body. She moved when he pulled it out from 
　　under her, and a few seconds later her eyes managed to open.

　　“Cover her!” Alex commanded gruffly, now clearly enjoying his new 
　　role as threatening-man-in-charge. And without comment, Freak Boy 
　　pulled the cover over her shoulders so that only a tangle of her 
　　black curls was visible.

　　“What’s going on?” Lily croaked while willing her eyes to stay open. 
　　She turned to see me trembling in anger in her doorway, Alex hulking 
　　about doing manly poses, and Freak Boy scrambling to tie his blue 
　　and canary yellow Diadoras and get the hell out before things got 
　　really ugly. Too late. Her gaze stopped on Freak Boy.

　　“Who the hell are you?” she asked him, bolting upright without even 
　　realizing that she was now completely naked. Alex and I 
　　instinctively turned away while she pulled the covers up, looking 
　　shocked, but Freak Boy grinned lecherously and ogled her breasts.

　　“Baby, you tellin’ me you don’t remember who I am?” he asked, his 
　　thick Australian accent becoming less adorable with every passing 
　　second. “You sure knew who I was last night.” He walked over to her 
　　and looked like he was about to sit down on the bed, but Alex had 
　　already grabbed his arm and pulled him upright.

　　“Out. Now. Or I’m going to have to carry you myself,” he commanded, 
　　looking tough and very cute and not a little proud of himself.

　　Freak Boy threw up his hands and made clucking noises. “I’m outta 
　　here. Call me sometime, Lily. You were great last night.” He moved 
　　quickly through the bedroom door toward the living room with Alex in 
　　pursuit. “Man, she sure as hell is a feisty one,” I heard him say to 
　　Alex right before the front door slammed shut, but it didn’t appear 
　　that Lily had heard. She had pulled on a T-shirt and managed to pull 
　　herself out of bed.

　　“Lily, who the hell was that? He was the biggest jerk I’ve ever met, 
　　not to mention absolutelydisgusting .”

　　She shook her head slowly and appeared to be concentrating very 
　　hard, trying to remember where he’d entered her life. “Disgusting. 
　　You’re right, he is absolutely disgusting, and I have no idea what 
　　happened. I remember you leaving last night and talking to some 
　　really nice guy in a suit―we were doing shots of Jaeger, for some 
　　reason―and that’s it.”

　　“Lily, just imagine how drunk you had to be to agree to not only 
　　have sex with someone who looks like that, but to bring him back to 
　　our apartment!” I thought I was pointing out the obvious, but her 
　　eyes widened into surprised realization.

　　“You think I had sex with him?” she asked softly, refusing to 
　　acknowledge what seemed certain.

　　Alex’s words from a few months before came back to me: Lily did 
　　drink more than was normal―all the signs were there. She was missing 
　　classes regularly, had gotten arrested, and now had dragged Home the 
　　scariest-looking mutant of a guy I’d ever laid eyes on. I also 
　　remembered the message one of her professors had left on our machine 
　　right after finals, something to the effect that while Lily’s final 
　　paper had been stellar, she’d missed too many classes and handed 
　　things in too late to give her the “A” she deserved. I decided to 
　　tread carefully. “Lil, sweetie, I don’t think the problem is the 
　　guy. I think it’s the drinking that’s causing it.”

　　She had begun brushing her hair, and it wasn’t until now that I 
　　realized it was already six o’clock on a Friday night and she was 
　　just getting out of bed. She wasn’t protesting, so I continued.

　　“It’s not that I have any issue with drinking,” I said, trying to 
　　keep the conversation relatively peaceful. “Clearly, I’m not 
　　antidrinking. I just wonder if it’s gotten a little bit out of 
　　control lately, you know? Has everything been OK at school?”

　　She opened her mouth to say something, but Alex popped his head in 
　　the door and handed me my shrieking Cell Phone. “It’s her,” he said 
　　and left again.Argghhh! The woman had a very special gift for 
　　wrecking my life.

　　“Sorry,” I said to Lily, looking at the phone warily as the display 
　　screamed MP CELL over and over again. “It usually only takes a 
　　second for her to humiliate or reprimand me, so hold that thought.” 
　　Lily set down her brush and watched me answer.

　　“Miran―” Again, I’d almost answered the line as though it were her 
　　own. “This is Andrea,” I corrected, bracing for the barrage.

　　“Andrea, you know I expect you there at six-thirty tonight, do you 
　　not?” she barked into the phone without a greeting or identification 
　　of any sort.

　　“Oh, um, you had said seven o’clock earlier. I still need to―”

　　“I said six-thirty before and I’m saying it again 
　　now.Siiiiix-thiiiiirty . Get it?” Click. She’d hung up. I looked at 
　　my watch. 6:05P .M. This was a problem.

　　“She wants me there in twenty-five minutes,” I stated out loud to no 
　　one in particular.

　　Lily looked relieved for the distraction. “Let’s get you moving 
　　then, OK?”

　　“We’re midconversation here, and this is important. What were you 
　　going to say before?” The words were right, but it was clear to both 
　　of us that my mind was already a million miles away. I’d already 
　　decided there was no time to shower, as I now had fifteen minutes to 
　　zip myself into black-tie and get into a car.

　　“Seriously, Andy, you’ve got to move. Go get ready―we’ll do this 
　　later.”

　　And once again I was left with no choice but to move quickly, heart 
　　racing, climbing into my gown and running a brush through my hair 
　　and trying to match some of the names with the pictures of the 
　　evening’s guests that Emily had helpfully printed out earlier. Lily 
　　watched the whole thing unwind with mild amusement, but I knew she 
　　was worrying about the incident with Freak Boy, and I felt terrible 
　　I couldn’t deal with it right then. Alex was on his phone with his 
　　little brother, trying to convince him that he really was too young 
　　to go to a movie at nine o’clock and that their mother wasn’t cruel 
　　in forbidding him to do so.

　　I kissed him on the cheek as he whistled and told me that he’d 
　　probably meet some people for dinner but to call him later if I 
　　wanted to meet up, and ran as best one can in stilts back to the 
　　living room, where Lily was holding a gorgeous piece of black silk 
　　fabric. I looked at her questioningly.

　　“A wrap, for your big night,” she sang, shaking it out like a 
　　bedsheet. “I want my Andy to look just as sophisticated as all the 
　　big-money Carolina rednecks she’ll be serving tonight like a common 
　　waitress. My grandmother bought it for me years ago to wear to 
　　Eric’s wedding. I can’t decide if it’s gorgeous or hideous, but it’s 
　　black-tie enough and it’s Chanel, so it should do.”

　　I hugged her. “Just promise if Miranda kills me for saying the wrong 
　　thing that you’ll burn this dress and make sure I’m buried in my 
　　Brown sweatpants. Promise me!” She grabbed the mascara wand I was 
　　waving about and started working on me.

　　“You look great, Andy, really you do. Never thought I’d see you in 
　　an Oscar gown going to one of Miranda Priestly’s parties, but, hey, 
　　you look the part. Now go.”

　　She handed me the dangling, obnoxiously bright Judith Leiber bag and 
　　held the door as I walked into the hallway. “Have fun!”

　　The car was waiting outside my building and John―who was shaping up 
　　to be a first-class pervert―whistled as the driver held the door 
　　open for me.

　　“Knock ’em dead, hottie,” he called after me with an exaggerated 
　　wink. “See ya late-night.” He had no idea where I was going, of 
　　course, but it was comforting that he thought I’d at least be coming 
　　Home.Maybe it won’t be that bad, I thought as I settled into the 
　　cushy backseat of the Town Car. But then my dress slid up over my 
　　knees and the back of my legs touched the ice-cold leather seats, 
　　and I lurched forward.Or, maybe, it will suck just as much as I 
　　think it will?

　　The driver jumped out and ran around to open the door for me, but I 
　　was standing on the curb by the time he’d made it around. I’d been 
　　to the Met once before, on a day trip to New York with my mom and 
　　Jill to see some of the tourist sights. I didn’t remember any of the 
　　actual exhibits we saw that day―only how much my new shoes had hurt 
　　by the time we got there―but I recalled the never-ending white 
　　staircase out front and the feeling that I could climb those stairs 
　　forever.

　　The stairs stood where I remembered them but looked different in the 
　　haze of dusk. Still accustomed to the short, miserable days of 
　　winter, I thought it seemed strange that the sky was just darkening 
　　and it was already six-thirty. That night the stairs looked 
　　positively regal. They were prettier than the Spanish Steps or the 
　　ones outside the library at Columbia, or even the awe-inspiring 
　　spread at the Capitol building in D.C. It wasn’t until I’d made it 
　　to about the tenth one of those white beauties that I began to 
　　loathe them. What cruel, cruel sadist would make a woman in a 
　　skintight, floor-length gown and spiked heels climb such a hill of 
　　hell? Since I couldn’t very well hate the architect or even the 
　　museum official who’d commissioned him, I was forced to hate 
　　Miranda, who could usually be blamed for directly or indirectly 
　　causing all the misery and bad will in my life.

　　The top felt like a mile away, and I flashed back to the spinning 
　　classes I used to take when I still had time to go to the gym. Some 
　　Nazi instructor would sit atop her little bike and bark out orders 
　　in perfect military staccato: “Pump, pump, and breathe, breathe! 
　　Climb, people, climb that hill. You’re almost at the top! Don’t lose 
　　it now! Climb for your life!” I closed my eyes and tried to envision 
　　pedaling instead, the wind in my hair, running over the instructor, 
　　but climbing, still climbing. Oh, anything to forget the fiery pain 
　　that shot from little toe to heel to back again. Ten more steps, 
　　that was all that was left, just ten more, oh, god, was that wetness 
　　in my shoes blood? Would I have to walk before Miranda in a sweaty 
　　Oscar gown and bloody feet? Please, oh please, say that I was almost 
　　there and . . . there! The top. The feeling of victory was no less 
　　than that of a world-class sprinter who’d just won her first gold 
　　medal. I inhaled mightily, clenched my fingers to fight off the urge 
　　for a victory cigarette, and reapplied my Fudgsicle Lipsmackers. It 
　　was time to be a lady.

　　The guard opened the door for me, bowed slightly, and smiled. He 
　　probably thought I was a guest.

　　“Hi, miss, you must be Andrea. Ilana said to have a seat right over 
　　there, and she’ll be out in a minute.” He turned away and spoke 
　　discreetly into a microphone on his sleeve and nodded when he heard 
　　a response through his earpiece. “Yes, right over there, miss. 
　　She’ll be here as soon as she can.”

　　I looked around the enormous entryway but didn’t feel like going 
　　through the dress-adjustment hassle of actually sitting. Besides, 
　　when would I ever again have the chance to be in the Metropolitan 
　　Museum of Art, after hours, with apparently no one else there? The 
　　ticket booths were empty and the ground-level galleries dark, but 
　　the sense of history, of culture, was awesome. The silence itself 
　　was deafening.

　　After nearly fifteen minutes of peering around, being careful not to 
　　wander too far from the aspiring Secret Service agent, a rather 
　　ordinary-looking girl in a long navy dress crossed the massive foyer 
　　and walked toward me. I was surprised that someone with a job as 
　　glamorous as hers (working in the special events office of the 
　　museum) could be so plain, and I felt instantly ridiculous, like a 
　　girl from a small town trying to dress for a big-city black-tie 
　　affair―which, ironically enough, was exactly who I was. Ilana, on 
　　the other hand, looked like she hadn’t even bothered to change out 
　　of work clothes, and I learned later that she hadn’t.

　　“Why bother?” She’d laughed. “It’s not like these people are here to 
　　look at me.” Her brown hair was clean and straight but lacking in 
　　style, and her brown flats were horrifically unfashionable. But her 
　　blue eyes were bright and kind, and I knew instantly that I would 
　　like her.

　　“You must be Ilana,” I said, sensing that I somehow had seniority in 
　　the situation and was expected to take charge. “I’m Andrea. I’m 
　　Miranda’s assistant, and I’m here to help in any way I can.”

　　She looked so relieved, I instantly wondered what Miranda had said 
　　to her. The possibilities were endless, but I imagined it had 
　　something to do with Ilana’sLadies’Home Journal getup. I shuddered 
　　to think what wicked thing she’d uttered to such a sweet girl and 
　　prayed she wouldn’t start to cry. Instead, she turned to me with 
　　those big innocent eyes, leaned forward, and declared 
　　none-too-quietly, “Your boss is a first-rate bitch.”

　　I stared, shocked, for just a moment before recovering. “She is, 
　　isn’t she?” I said, and we both laughed. “What do you need me to do? 
　　Miranda’s going to be able to sense that I’m here in about ten 
　　seconds, so I should look like I’m doing something.”

　　“Here, I’ll show you the table,” she said, walking down a darkened 
　　hallway toward the Egyptian exhibits. “It’s dynamite.”

　　We arrived in a smaller gallery, perhaps the size of a tennis court 
　　with a rectangular, twenty-four-seat table stretched down the 
　　middle. Robert Isabell was worth it, I could see. He was the New 
　　York party planner, the only one who could be trusted to strike just 
　　the right note with astonishing attention to detail: fashionable 
　　without being trendy, luxe but not ostentatious, unique without 
　　being over the top. Miranda insisted that Robert do everything, but 
　　the only time I’d ever seen his work before was at Cassidy and 
　　Caroline’s birthday party. I knew he could manage to turn Miranda’s 
　　colonial-style living room into a chic downtown lounge (complete 
　　with soda bar―in martini glasses, of course―ultra-suede, built-in 
　　banquettes, and a fully heated, tented balcony dance floor with a 
　　Moroccan theme) for ten-year-olds, but this was truly spectacular.

　　Everything glowed white. Light white, smooth white, bright white, 
　　textured white, and rich white. Bundles of milky white peonies 
　　looked as if they grew from the table itself, deliciously lush but 
　　low enough to allow people to talk over them. Bone white china (with 
　　a white checked pattern) rested on a crisp white linen tablecloth, 
　　and high-backed white oak chairs were covered in luscious white 
　　suede (the danger!), all atop a plush white carpet, specially laid 
　　for the evening. White votive candles in simple white porcelain 
　　holders gave off a soft white light, highlighting (but somehow not 
　　burning) the peonies from underneath and providing subtle, 
　　unobtrusive illumination around the table. The only color in the 
　　entire room came from the elaborate multihued canvases that hung on 
　　the walls surrounding the table, shocking blues and greens and golds 
　　from the depictions of early Egyptian life. The white table as a 
　　deliberate contrast to the priceless, detailed paintings was 
　　exquisite.

　　As I turned my head around to take in the wonderful contrast of the 
　　color and the white (“That Robert really is a genius!”), a vibrant 
　　red figure caught my eye. In the corner, standing ramrod straight 
　　under a looming painting was Miranda, wearing the beaded red Chanel 
　　that had been commissioned, cut, fitted, and precleaned just for 
　　tonight. And although it’d be a stretch to say that it had been 
　　worth every penny (since those pennies added up to tens of thousands 
　　of dollars), she did look breathtaking. She herself was anobjet 
　　d’art, chin jutted upward and muscles perfectly taut, a neoclassical 
　　relief in beaded Chanel silk. She wasn’t beautiful―her eyes were a 
　　bit too beady and her hair too severe and her face much too hard―but 
　　she was stunning in a way I couldn’t make sense of, and no matter 
　　how hard I tried to play it cool, to pretend to be admiring the 
　　room, I couldn’t take my eyes off her.

　　As usual, the sound of her voice broke my reverie. “Ahn-dre-ah, you 
　　do know the names and faces of our guests this evening, do you not? 
　　I assume you have properly studied their portraits. I expect you 
　　won’t humiliate me tonight by failing to greet someone by name,” she 
　　announced, looking nowhere, with only my name indicating that her 
　　words might somehow be directed toward me.

　　“Um, yes, I’ve got it covered,” I answered, suppressing the urge to 
　　salute and still acutely aware that I was staring. “I’ll take a few 
　　minutes now and make sure I’m positive.” She looked at me as if to 
　　sayYou sure will, you idiot, and I forced myself to look away and 
　　walk out of the gallery. Ilana was right behind me.

　　“What’s she talking about?” she whispered, leaning toward me. 
　　“Portraits? Is she crazy?”

　　We sat down on an uncomfortable wooden bench in a darkened hallway, 
　　both of us overwhelmed with the need to hide. “Oh, that. Yeah, 
　　normally I would’ve spent the last week trying to find pictures of 
　　the guests tonight and memorizing them so I could greet them by 
　　name,” I explained to a horrified Ilana. She stared at me 
　　incredulously. “But since she just told me I had to come today, I 
　　only had a few minutes in the car to look them over.

　　“What?” I asked. “You thinkthis is strange? Whatever. It’s standard 
　　stuff for a Miranda party.”

　　“Well, I thought there wouldn’t be anyone famous here tonight,” she 
　　said, referring to Miranda’s past parties at the Met. Since she was 
　　a huge contributor, Miranda was often granted the very special 
　　privilege of renting out, oh, THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART for 
　　private parties and cocktail hours. Mr. Tomlinson had had to ask 
　　only once, and Miranda was scrambling to make her brother-in-law’s 
　　party the best the Met had ever seen. She figured it would impress 
　　the rich Southerners and their trophy wives to dine for a night at 
　　the Met. She was right.

　　“Yeah, there won’t be anyone we’d recognize right away, just a lot 
　　of billionaires with homes below the Mason-Dixon line. Usually when 
　　I have to memorize the guests’ faces, they’re easier to find online 
　　or inWWD or something. I mean, you can generally locate a picture of 
　　Queen Noor or Michael Bloomberg or Yohji Yamamoto if you have to. 
　　But just try to find Mr. and Mrs. Packard from some rich suburb of 
　　Charleston or wherever the hell they live and it’s not so easy. 
　　Miranda’s other assistant was looking for these people while 
　　everyone else was getting me ready, and she eventually found almost 
　　everyone in the society pages of their Hometown newspapers or on 
　　various companies’ web sites, but it was really annoying.”

　　Ilana continued to stare. I think somehow I knew that I was sounding 
　　like a robot, but I couldn’t stop. Her shock only made me feel 
　　worse.

　　“There’s only one couple I haven’t identified yet, so I guess I’ll 
　　know them by default,” I said.

　　“Oh, my. I don’t know how you do it. I’m annoyed I have to be here 
　　on a Friday night, but I can’t imagine doing your job. How do you 
　　take it? How do you stand being spoken to and treated like that?”

　　It took me a moment to realize that this question caught me 
　　off-guard: no one had really ever volunteered anything negative 
　　about my job. I’d always thought I was the only one―among the 
　　millions of imaginary girls that would “die” for my job―who saw 
　　anything remotely disturbing about my situation. It was more 
　　horrifying to see the shock in her eyes than it was to witness the 
　　hundreds of ridiculous things I saw each and every day at work; the 
　　way she looked at me with that pure, unadulterated pity triggered 
　　something inside me. I did what I hadn’t done in months of working 
　　under subhuman conditions for a nonhuman boss, what I always managed 
　　to keep suppressed for a more appropriate time. I started to cry.

　　Ilana looked more shocked than ever. “Oh, sweetie, come here! I’m so 
　　sorry! I didn’t mean anything by it. You’re a saint for putting up 
　　with that witch, you hear me? Come with me.” She pulled me by the 
　　hand and led me down another darkened hallway toward an office in 
　　the back. “Here, now sit for a minute and forget all about what 
　　these stupid people look like.”

　　I sniffled and started to feel stupid.

　　“And don’t feel strange, you hear? I have a feeling you kept that 
　　inside for a long, long time and you have to have a good cry every 
　　now and then.”

　　She was fumbling around in her desk for something while I tried to 
　　wipe the mascara from my cheeks. “Here,” she proclaimed proudly. 
　　“I’m destroying this right after you see it, and if you even think 
　　of telling anyone about it, I’ll wreck your life. But just look, 
　　it’s amazing.” She handed me a manila envelope sealed with a 
　　“Confidential” sticker and smiled.

　　I tore off the sticker and pulled a green folder out. Inside was a 
　　photo―a color photocopy, actually―of Miranda stretched out on a 
　　restaurant banquette. I recognized it immediately as a picture taken 
　　by a famous society photographer during a recent birthday party for 
　　Donna Karan at Pastis. It had already appeared on the pages ofNew 
　　York magazine and was bound to keep showing up. In it she was 
　　wearing her signature brown and white snakeskin trench coat, the one 
　　I always thought made her look like a snake.

　　Well, it seems I wasn’t alone, because in this version, someone had 
　　subtly―expertly―attached a scaled-to-size cutout of a rattlesnake’s 
　　rattle directly where her legs should have been. The effect was a 
　　fabulous rendition of Miranda as Snake: she rested her elbow on the 
　　banquette, cradled her chiseled chin in her palm, and stretched out 
　　across the leather, with her rattle curled in a semicircle and 
　　hanging off the edge of the bench. It was perfect.

　　“Isn’t it great?” Ilana asked, leaning over my shoulder. “Linda came 
　　into my office one afternoon. She’d just spent the entire day on the 
　　phone with Miranda, selecting which gallery they’d dine in. Linda 
　　naturally insisted on one gallery because it’s by far the best size 
　　and most beautiful, but Miranda mandated that it be held in the 
　　other one near the gift shop. They went back and forth for a while 
　　before Linda finally―after days of negotiations―got permission from 
　　the board to hold it in Miranda’s gallery, and she was so excited to 
　　call Miranda and tell her the great news. Guess what happened when . 
　　. .”

　　“She changed her mind, obviously,” I said quietly, feeling her 
　　irritation. “She decided to do exactly as Linda suggested in the 
　　first place, but only once she was sure everyone would jump through 
　　all her hoops.”

　　“Precisely. Well, this irritated the hell out of me. I’ve never seen 
　　the entire museum turn itself upside down for anyone―I mean, christ, 
　　the president of the United States could ask to have a State 
　　Department dinner here and they wouldn’t let him! And then your boss 
　　thinks she can march in and order everyone around, make our lives a 
　　living hell for days on end. Anyway, I made this pretty little 
　　picture as a pick-me-up for Linda. You know what she did with it? 
　　Shrunk it on the copier so she could have a little one for her 
　　wallet! I just thought you’d get a kick out of this. Even if it’s 
　　just to remind you that you’re not alone. You’re definitely the 
　　worst off, but you’re not alone.”

　　I stuck the picture back in its confidential envelope and handed it 
　　back to Ilana. “You’re the best,” I said, touching her shoulder. “I 
　　really, really appreciate it. I promise to never, ever tell anyone 
　　where I got this, but will you please send this to me? I don’t think 
　　it’ll fit in the Leiber bag, but I’d give anything if you’d send it 
　　to me at Home. Please?”

　　She smiled and motioned for me to write my address, and we both 
　　stood up and walked (I hobbled) back to the museum’s foyer. It was 
　　just about seven, and the guests were due to arrive any minute. 
　　Miranda and B-DAD were talking to his brother, the honored guest and 
　　groom, who looked like he had played soccer, football, lacrosse, and 
　　rugby at a Southern school―one where he was always surrounded by 
　　cooing blondes. The cooing blonde of twenty-six who was to become 
　　his bride was standing quietly by his side, gazing up at him 
　　adoringly. She was holding a snifter of something and chortling at 
　　his jokes.

　　Miranda was hanging on to B-DAD’s forearm with the fakest of smiles 
　　plastered across her face. I didn’t have to hear what they were 
　　saying to know that she was barely responding at the appropriate 
　　time. Social graces were not her strength, as she had little 
　　tolerance for small talk―but I knew she’d be on her best kiss-ass 
　　behavior tonight. I’d come to realize that her “friends” all fell 
　　into one of two categories. There were those she perceived as 
　　“above” her and who must be impressed. This list was short, but it 
　　generally included people like Irv Ravitz, Oscar de la Renta, 
　　Hillary Clinton, and any first-rate, A-list movie star. Then there 
　　were those “below” her, who must be patronized and belittled so they 
　　don’t forget their place, which included basically everyone else: 
　　allRunway employees, all family members, all parents of her 
　　children’s friends―unless they coincidentally fell into category 
　　number one―almost all designers and other magazine editors, and 
　　every single solitary person in the service industry, both here and 
　　abroad. Tonight was sure to be amusing because these were category 
　　two people who would have to be treated like category ones, merely 
　　because of their association with Mr. Tomlinson and his brother. I 
　　always enjoyed the rare occasions when I got to watch Miranda try to 
　　impress those around her, mostly because she wasn’t naturally 
　　charming.

　　I felt the first guests arrive before I saw them. The tension in the 
　　room was palpable. Remembering my color printouts, I rushed over to 
　　the couple and offered to take the woman’s fur wrap. “Mr. and Mrs. 
　　Wilkinson, thank you so much for joining us this evening. Please, 
　　I’ll take that. And Ilana here will show you to the atrium, where 
　　cocktails are being served.” I hoped I wasn’t staring during my 
　　monologue, but the spectacle was truly outrageous. I’d seen women 
　　dressed like hookers and men dressed like women and models not 
　　dressed at all at Miranda’s parties, but never before had I seen 
　　people dressed like this. I knew it wasn’t going to be a trendy New 
　　York crowd, but I was expecting them to look like something out 
　　ofDallas ; instead, they looked like a dressier version of the cast 
　　fromDeliverance .

　　Mr. Tomlinson’s brother, himself distinguished looking with silver 
　　hair, made the horrible mistake of wearing white tails―in May, no 
　　less―with a plaid handkerchief and a cane. His fiancée had on an 
　　emerald green taffeta nightmare. It swirled and puffed and gathered 
　　and forced her enormous bust up and over the top of the dress so 
　　that it appeared her own silicon breasts might actually suffocate 
　　her. Diamonds the size of Dixie cups hung from her ears, and an even 
　　larger one sparkled from her left hand. Her hair was bleached white 
　　with peroxide, as were her teeth, and her heels were so high and so 
　　skinny, she walked as if she’d been a running back in the NFL for 
　　the past twelve years.

　　“Dah-lings, I amso delighted you could join us for a little pah-ty! 
　　Everyone loves pahties, now don’t they?” Miranda sang in a falsetto 
　　voice. The soon-to-be Mrs. Tomlinson looked as if she’d pass out. 
　　Right there before her was the one and only Miranda Priestly! Her 
　　glee embarrassed us all, and the whole wretched crowd moved into the 
　　atrium with Miranda leading the way.

　　The rest of the night went on much like the beginning. I recognized 
　　all the guests’ names and managed not to utter anything too 
　　humiliating. The parade of white tuxes, chiffon, big hair, bigger 
　　jewels, and barely postadolescent women ceased to amuse me as the 
　　hours wore on, but I never grew tired of watching Miranda. She was 
　　the true lady and the envy of every woman in that museum that night. 
　　And even though they understood that all the money in the world 
　　could never buy them her class and elegance, they never stopped 
　　wanting it.

　　I smiled genuinely when she dismissed me halfway through dinner, as 
　　usual without a thank-you or a good-night. (“Ahn-dre-ah, we won’t be 
　　needing you anymore this evening. See yourself out.”) I looked for 
　　Ilana, but she had already sneaked out. The car took only about ten 
　　minutes to arrive after I called for it―I had briefly considered 
　　taking the subway, but wasn’t sure how well the Oscar or my feet 
　　would’ve held up―and I sunk, exhausted but calm, into the backseat.

　　When I walked past John on my way to the elevator, he reached under 
　　his little table and pulled out a manila envelope. “Just got this a 
　　few minutes ago. It says ‘Urgent.’ ” I thanked him and sat down in a 
　　corner of the lobby, wondering who would be messengering me 
　　something at ten o’clock on a Friday night. I tore it open and 
　　pulled out a note:

　　Dearest Andrea,

　　It was so great to meet you tonight! Can we please get together next 
　　week for sushi or something? I dropped this off on my way Home― 
　　figured you could use the pick-me-up after a night like the one we 
　　just had. Enjoy.

　　Xoxo,

　　Ilana

　　Inside was the picture of Miranda as Snake, only Ilana had enlarged 
　　this one to a ten by thirteen size. I looked at it carefully for a 
　　few minutes, massaging the feet I’d finally pulled from the Manolos, 
　　and looked into Miranda’s eyes. She looked intimidating and mean and 
　　just like the bitch I stared at every day. But tonight she’d also 
　　looked sad, and not a little lonely. Adding this picture to my 
　　fridge and making fun of it with Lily and Alex wasn’t going to make 
　　my feet hurt any less, or give me back my Friday night. I tore it up 
　　and hobbled upstairs.

　　15

　　“Andrea, it’s Emily,” I heard a voice croak from the phone. 
　　“Can you hear me?” It had been months since Emily had called 
　　me at Home late at night, so I knew it had to be serious.

　　“Hi, sure. You sound like hell,” I said, bolting upright in 
　　bed, immediately wondering if Miranda had done something to 
　　make her sound that way. The last time Emily had called this 
　　late was when Miranda had called her at eleven on a Saturday 
　　night to demand that Emily charter her and Mr. Tomlinson a 
　　private jet to get Home from Miami since bad weather had 
　　canceled their regularly scheduled flight. Emily was just 
　　getting ready to leave her apartment to attend her own 
　　birthday party when the call came in, and she’d immediately 
　　called me and begged me to deal with it. I hadn’t gotten the 
　　message until the next day, though, and when I called her 
　　back, she was still in tears.

　　“I missed my own birthday party, Andrea,” she’d wailed the 
　　second she picked up the phone. “I missed my own birthday 
　　party because I had to charter them a flight!”

　　“They couldn’t get a hotel room for one night and come back 
　　the next day like normal people?” I’d asked, pointing out the 
　　obvious.

　　“Don’t you think I thought of that? I had penthouse suites 
　　reserved for them at the Shore Club, the Albion, and the 
　　Delano within seven minutes of her first phone call, figuring 
　　she couldn’t possibly be serious―I mean, my god, it was a 
　　Saturday night. How the hell do you charter a flight on a 
　　Saturday night?”

　　“I’m guessing she wasn’t so into that idea?” I’d asked 
　　soothingly, feeling genuinely guilty that I hadn’t been around 
　　to help her out and simultaneously ecstatic that I’d dodged 
　　that particular bullet.

　　“Yeah. Not so into it at all. She called every ten minutes, 
　　demanding to know why I hadn’t found her anything yet, and I 
　　had to keep putting these people on hold to answer her call, 
　　and when I went back to them, they’d hang up.” She gulped air. 
　　“It was a nightmare.”

　　“So what finally happened? I’m almost scared to ask.”

　　“What finally happened? Whatdidn’t finally happen? I called 
　　every single private charter company in the state of Florida 
　　and, as you might imagine, they weren’t answering their phones 
　　at midnight on a Saturday. I paged individual pilots, I called 
　　domestic airlines to see if they had any recommendations, I 
　　even managed to talk to some sort of supervisor at the Miami 
　　International Airport. Told him I needed a plane in the next 
　　half hour to fly two people to New York. Know what he did?”

　　“What?”

　　“He laughed. Hysterically. Accused me of being a front for 
　　terrorists, for drug smugglers, everything. Told me I had a 
　　better chance of getting hit by lightning exactly twenty times 
　　than I did of securing a plane and a pilot at that 
　　hour―regardless of how much I was willing to pay. And that if 
　　I called back again, he’d be forced to direct my inquiry to 
　　the FBI. Do you believe it?” She was screaming at this point. 
　　“Do you fucking believe it? The FBI!”

　　“And I assume Miranda didn’t like that, either?”

　　“Yeah, sheloooooved that one. She spent twenty minutes 
　　refusing to believe that there wasn’t a single plane 
　　available. I assured her that it wasn’t that they were all 
　　taken, just that it was a difficult time of night to be 
　　attempting to charter a flight.”

　　“So what happened?” I didn’t see this one ending happily.

　　“At about one-thirty in the morning she finally accepted that 
　　she wasn’t going to get Home that night―not that it mattered 
　　whatsoever, since the girls were with their father and the 
　　nanny was around all day Sunday if they needed her―and she had 
　　me buy her a ticket for the first flight out in the morning.”

　　This was puzzling. If her flight had been canceled, I’d 
　　assumed the airlines would’ve rescheduled her for the first 
　　flight out in the morning, especially considering her 
　　premier-advantage-plus-gold-platinum-diamond-executive-VIP 
　　mileage status and the original cost of her first-class 
　　tickets. I said as much.

　　“Yeah, well, Continental scheduled them for their first flight 
　　out, which was at six-fiftyA .M. But when Miranda heard that 
　　someone else had managed to get on a Delta flight at 
　　six-thirty-fiveA .M., she went ballistic. She called me an 
　　incompetent idiot, asked me over and over what good an 
　　assistant was if I couldn’t do something as simple as arrange 
　　for a private plane.” She’d sniffed and took a sip of 
　　something, probably Coffee.

　　“Ohmigod, I know what you’re going to say. Tell me you 
　　didn’t!”

　　“I did.”

　　“You didn’t. You’ve got to be kidding. For fifteen minutes?”

　　“I did! What choice did I have? She was really unhappy with 
　　me―at least this way, it seemed like I was actually doing 
　　something. It came to another couple thousand bucks―not 
　　exactly a big deal. She was bordering onhappy when we hung up. 
　　What else can you ask for?”

　　By this point we’d both started laughing. I knew without 
　　Emily’s telling me―and she knew I knew―that she’d gone ahead 
　　and purchased two additional Business-class tickets on the 
　　Delta flight for Miranda just to shut her up, to make the 
　　incessant demands and insults finally, blissfully, cease.

　　I was nearly choking at this point. “So, wait. By the time you 
　　arranged for a car to take her to the Delano―”

　　“―it was just before three in the morning, and she’d called my 
　　Cell Phone exactly twenty-two times since eleven. The driver 
　　waited while they showered and changed in their penthouse 
　　suite and then took them right back to the airport in time for 
　　theirearlier flight.”

　　“Stop! You’ve got to stop,” I howled, doubled over at this 
　　charming series of events. “This did not really happen.”

　　Emily stopped laughing and tried to feign seriousness. “Oh, 
　　really? You think all of this is good? I haven’t even told you 
　　the best part.”

　　“Oh, tell me, tell me!” I was positively gleeful that Emily 
　　and I had, for once, managed to find something funny at the 
　　exact same time. It felt good to be part of a team, one half 
　　in the battle against the oppressor. I realized then for the 
　　first time what a different year it would have been if Emily 
　　and I could’ve truly been friends, if we could have covered 
　　and protected and trusted each other enough to face Miranda as 
　　a united front. Things probably wouldn’t have been quite so 
　　unbearable, but, except for rare times like these, we didn’t 
　　agree on just about everything.

　　“The best part of all of it?” She was silent, dragging out the 
　　joy we shared a few moments longer. “She didn’t realize this, 
　　of course, but even though the Delta flight took off earlier, 
　　it was actually scheduled to land eight minutes after her 
　　original Continental!”

　　“Shut up!” I’d howled, delighted with this delicious new 
　　nugget of information. “You’vegot to be kidding me!”

　　When we finally hung up, I was surprised to see that we’d been 
　　talking for more than an hour, just like a couple of real 
　　friends would. Of course, we immediately reverted back to 
　　just-contained hostility on Monday, but my feelings for Emily 
　　were always a bit more affectionate after that weekend. Until 
　　now, of course. I sure didn’t like her enough to hear whatever 
　　surely irritating or inconvenient thing she was preparing to 
　　dump on me.

　　“Really, you sound horrible. Are you sick?” I tried valiantly 
　　to interject a touch of sympathy in my voice, but the question 
　　came out sounding aggressive and accusatory.

　　“Oh yeah,” she rasped before breaking into hacking coughs. 
　　“Really sick.”

　　I never really believed it when anyone said they were really 
　　sick: without a diagnosis of something very official and 
　　potentially life-threatening, you were well enough to work 
　　atRunway . So when Emily finished hacking and reiterated that 
　　she was really ill, I didn’t even consider the possibility 
　　that she wouldn’t be at work on Monday. After all, she was 
　　scheduled to fly to Paris to meet Miranda on October 18 and 
　　that was only slightly more than a week away. And besides, I’d 
　　managed to ignore a couple strep throats, a few bouts of 
　　bronchitis, a horrific round of food poisoning, and a 
　　perpetual smoker’s cough and cold and hadn’t taken a single 
　　sick day in nearly a year of work.

　　I’d sneaked in a single doctor’s appointment when I was 
　　desperate for antibiotics with one of the cases of strep 
　　throat (I ducked into his office and ordered them to see me 
　　right away when Miranda and Emily thought that I was out 
　　scouting for new cars for Mr. Tomlinson), but there was never 
　　time for preventative work. Although I’d had a dozen sets of 
　　highlights from Marshall, quite a few free massages from spas 
　　that felt honored to have Miranda’s assistant as a guest, and 
　　countless manicures, pedicures, and makeovers, I hadn’t seen a 
　　dentist or a gynecologist in a year.

　　“Anything I can do?” I asked, trying to sound casual while I 
　　racked my brain thinking of why she’d called to tell me that 
　　she didn’t feel well. As far as we were both concerned, it was 
　　completely and entirely irrelevant. She’d be at work on Monday 
　　whether she felt well or not.

　　She coughed deeply and I heard phlegm rattling in her lungs. 
　　“Um, yeah, actually. God, I can’t believe this is happening to 
　　me!”

　　“What? What’s happening?”

　　“I can’t go to Europe with Miranda. I have mono.”

　　“What?”

　　“You heard me, I can’t go. The doctor called today with the 
　　blood results, and as of right now, I’m not allowed to leave 
　　my apartment for the next three weeks.”

　　Three weeks! She had to be kidding. There wasn’t time to feel 
　　badly for her―she’d just told me she wasn’t going to Europe, 
　　and it was that thought alone―the idea that both Miranda and 
　　Emily would be out of my life―that had sustained me through 
　　the past couple months.

　　“Em, she’s going to kill you―you have to go! Does she know 
　　yet?”

　　There was a foreboding silence on the other end. “Um, yeah, 
　　she knows.”

　　“You called her?”

　　“Yes. I had my doctor call her, actually, because she didn’t 
　　think that having mono really qualified me as sick, so he had 
　　to tell her that I could infect her and everyone else, and 
　　anyway . . .” Her sentence trailed off, and her tone was 
　　suggestive of something far, far worse.

　　“Anyway what?” My self-preservation instincts had kicked into 
　　overdrive.

　　“Anyway . . . she wants you to go with her.”

　　“She wants me to go with her, huh? That’s cute. What’d she 
　　really say? She didn’t threaten to fire you for getting sick, 
　　did she?”

　　“Andrea, I’m―” a deep, mucousy cough shook her voice and I 
　　thought for a moment that she might very well die right there 
　　on the phone with me “―serious. Completely and totally 
　　serious. She said something about the assistants they give her 
　　abroad being idiots and that even you’d be better to have 
　　around than them.”

　　“Oh, well, when you put it like that, sign me up! Nothing 
　　quite like some over-the-top flattery to convince me to do 
　　something. Seriously, she shouldn’t have said such nice 
　　things. I’m blushing!” I didn’t know whether to focus on the 
　　fact that Miranda wanted me to go to Paris with her, or that 
　　she only wanted me to go because she considered me slightly 
　　less brain-dead than the anorexic French clones of, well . . . 
　　me.

　　“Oh, just shut up already,” she croaked in between fits of now 
　　annoying coughing. “You’re the luckiest fucking person in the 
　　world. I’ve been waiting two years―over two years―for this 
　　trip, and now I can’t go. The irony of this is painful―you 
　　realize that, don’t you?”

　　“Of course I do! It’s one giant cliché: this trip is your sole 
　　reason for living and it’s the bane of my existence, yet I’m 
　　going and you’re not. life is funny, huh? I’m laughing so hard 
　　I can barely stop,” I deadpanned, sounding not the least bit 
　　amused.

　　“Yeah, well, I think it sucks, too, but what can you do? I 
　　already called Jeffy to tell him to start calling in clothes 
　　for you. You’ll have to bring a ton since you’ll need 
　　different outfits for each of the shows you attend, any 
　　dinners, and, of course, for Miranda’s party at the Hotel 
　　Costes. Allison will help you out with makeup. Talk to Stef in 
　　accessories for bags and shoes and jewelry. You only have a 
　　week, so get on it first thing tomorrow, OK?”

　　“I still don’t really believe she expects me to do this.”

　　“Well, believe it, because she sure wasn’t kidding. Since I’m 
　　not going to be able to come to the office at all this week, 
　　you’re also going to―”

　　“What? You’re not even going to come into theoffice ?” I might 
　　not have taken a sick day or spent a single hour outside the 
　　office while Miranda was there, but Emily hadn’t, either. The 
　　one time it had been close―when her great-grandfather had 
　　died―she’d managed to get Home to Philadelphia, attend the 
　　funeral, and be back at her desk without missing a minute of 
　　work. This was how things worked. Period. Short of death 
　　(immediate family only), dismemberment (your own), or nuclear 
　　war (only if confirmed by the U.S. government to be directly 
　　affecting Manhattan), one was to be present. This would be a 
　　watershed moment in the Priestly regime.

　　“Andrea, I have mononucleosis. I’m highly infectious. It’s 
　　really serious. I’m not supposed to leave my apartment for a 
　　cup of Coffee, never mind go to work for the day. Miranda 
　　understands that, and so you’ll need to pick up the slack. 
　　There will be a lot to do to get both of you ready for Paris. 
　　Miranda leaves on Wednesday for Milan, and then you’ll be 
　　leaving to meet her in Paris the following Tuesday.”

　　“She understands that? C’mon! Tell me what she really said.” I 
　　refused to believe that she’d accepted something as mundane as 
　　mono for an excuse to not be available. “Just give me that 
　　small pleasure. After all, my life will be hell for the next 
　　few weeks.”

　　Emily sighed, and I could feel her eyes roll over the phone. 
　　“Well, she wasn’t thrilled. I didn’t actually talk to her, you 
　　see, but my doctor said she kept asking if mono is a ‘real’ 
　　disease. But when he assured her that it was, she was very 
　　understanding.”

　　I laughed out loud. “I’m sure she was, Em, I’m sure she was. 
　　Don’t worry about a thing, OK? You just concentrate on feeling 
　　better, and I’ll take care of everything else.”

　　“I’ll e-mail you a checklist, just so you don’t forget 
　　anything.”

　　“I won’t forget anything. She’s been to Europe four times in 
　　the past year. I’ve got it down. I’ll get the cash from the 
　　basement bank, change a few grand into euros, buy a few more 
　　grand’s worth of traveler’s checks, and triple confirm all of 
　　her hair and makeup appointments while she’s there. What else? 
　　Oh, I’ll make sure the Ritz gives her the right Cell Phone 
　　this time, and I’ll speak to the drivers ahead of time to make 
　　sure they know they can’t ever leave her waiting. I’m already 
　　thinking of all the people who’ll need copies of her 
　　itinerary―which I’ll type up, no problem―and I’ll see to it 
　　that it gets passed around. And of course she’ll have a 
　　detailed itinerary as to the twins’ classes, lessons, 
　　practices, and play dates, and full listings of the entire 
　　household staff’s work schedules. See! You don’t have to 
　　worry―I’ve got it all under control.”

　　“Don’t forget about the velvet,” she chided, singing the last 
　　couple words as if on autopilot. “Or the scarves!”

　　“Of course not! They’re already on my list.” Before Miranda 
　　packed for anything―or rather, had her housekeeper pack 
　　her―either Emily or I would purchase massive rolls of velvet 
　　at a fabric store and bring them to Miranda’s apartment. 
　　There, we’d work with the housekeeper to cut them in the exact 
　　shape and size of every article of clothing she was planning 
　　to bring, and individually wrap each item in the plush 
　　material. The velvet packages were then neatly stacked in 
　　dozens of Louis Vuitton suitcases, with plenty of extra pieces 
　　included for when she inevitably threw the first batch out 
　　upon unpacking in Paris. In addition, usually one half of a 
　　suitcase was occupied by a couple dozen orange Hermès boxes, 
　　each containing a single white scarf just waiting to be lost, 
　　forgotten, misplaced, or simply discarded.

　　I hung up with Emily after making a good effort to sound 
　　sincerely sympathetic and found Lily stretched out on the 
　　couch, smoking a cigarette and sipping a clear liquid that was 
　　definitely not water from a cocktail glass.

　　“I thought we weren’t allowed to smoke in here,” I said, 
　　flopping down next to her and immediately putting my feet on 
　　the scuffed wooden Coffee table my parents had handed down to 
　　us. “Not that I care, but that wasyour rule.” Lily wasn’t a 
　　full-time, committed smoker like yours truly; she usually 
　　smoked only when she drank and wasn’t one to even buy packs. A 
　　brand-new box of Camel Special Lights peeked out of the chest 
　　pocket of her oversize button-down. I nudged her thigh with my 
　　slippered foot and nodded toward the cigarettes. She handed 
　　them over with a lighter.

　　“I knew you wouldn’t care,” she said, taking a leisurely drag 
　　off her cigarette. “I’m procrastinating and it helps me 
　　concentrate.”

　　“What do you have due?” I asked, lighting my own cigarette and 
　　tossing back the lighter. She was taking seventeen credits 
　　this semester in an effort to pull up her GPA after last 
　　spring’s mediocre showing. I watched as she took another drag 
　　and washed it down with a healthy gulp of her nonwater 
　　beverage. It didn’t appear that she was on the right track.

　　She sighed heavily, meaningfully, and let the cigarette hang 
　　suspended from the corner of her mouth as she spoke. It 
　　flapped up and down, threatening to fall at any moment and, 
　　combined with her wild, unwashed hair and smeared eye makeup, 
　　made her look―just for a moment―like a defendant onJudge Judy 
　　(or maybe a plaintiff, since they always looked the same―lack 
　　of teeth, greasy hair, dull eyes, and propensity for using the 
　　double negative). “An article for some totally random, 
　　esoteric academic journal that no one will ever read but I 
　　still have to write, just so I can say I’m published.”

　　“That’s annoying. When’s it due?”

　　“Tomorrow.” Total nonchalance. She looked completely unfazed.

　　“Tomorrow? For real?”

　　She shot me a warning look, a quick reminder that I was 
　　supposed to be on her team. “Yes. Tomorrow. It really blows, 
　　considering that Freudian Boy is the one who’s assigned to 
　　edit it. No one seems to care that he’s a candidate in psych, 
　　not Russian lit―they’re just short copy editors, so he’s mine. 
　　There’s noway I’m getting that to him on time. Screw him.” 
　　Once again, she poured some of the liquid down her throat, 
　　making an obvious effort not to taste it, and grimaced.

　　“Lil, what happened? Granted, it’s been a few months, but last 
　　I heard, you were taking things slow and he was perfect. Of 
　　course, that was before that, thatthing you dragged Home, but 
　　. . .”

　　Another warning look, this time followed by a glare. I’d tried 
　　to talk to her about the whole Freak Boy incident a few dozen 
　　times, but it seemed like we were never really alone and 
　　neither of us had much time lately for heart-to-hearts. She 
　　immediately changed the subject whenever I brought it up. I 
　　could tell that more than anything she was embarrassed; she 
　　had acknowledged that he was vile, but she wouldn’t 
　　participate in any discussion whatsoever about the excessive 
　　drinking that was responsible for the whole episode.

　　“Yes, well, apparently at some point that night I called him 
　　from Au Bar and begged him to come meet me,” she said, 
　　avoiding eye contact, instead concentrating intently on using 
　　the remote control to switch tracks on the mournful Jeff 
　　Buckley CD that seemed to be on permanent replay in the 
　　apartment.

　　“So? Did he come and see you talking to, uh, to someone else?” 
　　I was trying not to push her away even more by being critical 
　　of her. There was obviously a lot going on inside her head, 
　　what with the problems at school and the drinking and the 
　　seemingly limitless supply of guys, and I wanted her to open 
　　up to someone. She’d never kept anything from me before, if 
　　for no other reason than I was all she had, but she hadn’t 
　　been telling me much of anything lately. It occurred to me how 
　　strange it was that we hadn’t bothered to discuss this until 
　　four months after the fact.

　　“No, not quite,” she said bitterly. “He came all the way there 
　　from Morningside Heights only to find me not there. Apparently 
　　he called my Cell Phone and Kenny answered and wasn’t all that 
　　nice.”

　　“Kenny?”

　　“Thatthing I dragged Home at the beginning of the summer, 
　　remember?” She said it sarcastically, but this time she 
　　smiled.

　　“Ah-hah. I’m guessing Freudian Boy didn’t take that well?”

　　“Not so much. Whatever. Easy come, easy go, right?” She 
　　scampered off to the kitchen with her empty glass and I saw 
　　her pour from a half-full bottle of Ketel One. A very small 
　　splash of soda, and she was back on the couch.

　　I was just about to inquire as gently as possible why she was 
　　inhaling vodka when she had an article due the next day, but 
　　the buzzer rang from downstairs.

　　“Who’s there?” I called to John by holding down the button.

　　“Mr. Fineman is here to see Ms. Sachs,” he announced formally, 
　　all Business now that other people were around.

　　“Really? Um, great. Send him up.”

　　Lily looked at me and raised her eyebrows, and I realized that 
　　once again we weren’t going to have this conversation. “You 
　　look psyched,” she said with obvious sarcasm. “Not exactly 
　　thrilled that your boyfriend is surprising you, are you?”

　　“Of course I am,” I said defensively, and we both knew I was 
　　lying. Things with Alex had been strained the past few weeks. 
　　Really strained. We went through all the motions of being 
　　together and we did it well: after almost four years, we 
　　certainly knew what the other wanted to hear or needed to do. 
　　But he’d compensated for all the time I spent at work by being 
　　even more angelic at school―volunteering to coach, tutor, 
　　mentor, and chair just about every activity someone could 
　　think up―and the time we did actually see each other was about 
　　as exciting as if we’d been married for thirty years. We had 
　　an unspoken understanding that we’d just wait things out until 
　　my year of servitude was over, but I wouldn’t let myself think 
　　about where the relationship might be headed then.

　　But still. That made two close people in my life―first Jill 
　　(who’d called me out on the miserable state of affairs on the 
　　phone the other night), and now Lily―who’d pointed out that 
　　Alex and I were less than adorable together lately, and I had 
　　to admit that Lily had, in her buzzed but nonetheless 
　　perceptive way, noticed that I was not happy to hear that Alex 
　　had arrived. I was dreading telling him that I had to go to 
　　Europe, dreading the inevitable fight that would ensue, a 
　　fight I very much would have liked to put off for a few more 
　　days. Ideally, not until I was in Europe. But no such luck, as 
　　he was currently knocking on my door.

　　“Hi!” I said a bit too enthusiastically as I pulled open the 
　　door and threw my arms around his neck. “What a great 
　　surprise!”

　　“You don’t mind that I just stopped by, do you? I met Max for 
　　a drink right around the corner and I thought I’d say hi.”

　　“Of course I don’t mind, silly! I’m thrilled. Come in, come 
　　in.” I knew I sounded positively manic, but any armchair 
　　shrink could easily point out that my outward enthusiasm was 
　　meant to overcompensate for all that was lacking inwardly.

　　He grabbed a beer and kissed Lily on the cheek and settled 
　　into the bright orange armchair my parents had saved from the 
　　seventies, just knowing that one day they could bestow it 
　　proudly on one of their offspring. “So, what’s going on here?” 
　　he asked, nodding toward the stereo, where a positively 
　　heart-wrenching version of “Hallelujah” was blaring.

　　Lily shrugged. “Procrastinating. What else?”

　　“Well, I have some news,” I said, trying to sound enthusiastic 
　　to convince both myself and Alex that this was, in fact, a 
　　positive development. He’d been so excited about arranging all 
　　the plans for our Homecoming weekend―and I’d been so pushy in 
　　getting him to do it―that it seemed downright cruel to be 
　　canceling on him less than a week and a half before we were 
　　going. We’d spent an entire night figuring out whom we wanted 
　　to invite to our big Sunday brunch, and even knew exactly 
　　where and with whom we’d be tailgating before the 
　　BrownCDartmouth game on Saturday.

　　They both looked at me, not a little warily, until Alex 
　　finally managed, “Yeah? What’s up?”

　　“Well! I just got the call―I’m going to Paris for a week!” I 
　　said this with the exuberance of telling an infertile couple 
　　that they were having twins.

　　“You’re going where?” Lily asked, looking puzzled and 
　　distracted, not entirely interested.

　　“You’re goingwhy ?” Alex asked at the exact same moment, 
　　looking about as pleased as if I’d just announced that I had 
　　tested positive for syphilis.

　　“Emily just found out she has mono, and Miranda wants me to 
　　accompany her to the shows. Isn’t that awesome?” I said, a 
　　chipper smile on my face. This was exhausting. I was dreading 
　　having to go myself, but it made it ten times worse to have to 
　　convince him that it was actually a really great opportunity.

　　“I don’t understand. Doesn’t she go to the shows like a 
　　thousand times a year?” he asked. I nodded. “So why does she 
　　all of a sudden need you to go with her now?”

　　Lily had tuned out at this point and seemed to be engrossed in 
　　flipping through an old issue ofThe New Yorker . I’d saved 
　　every copy from the past five years.

　　“She throws this massive party at the spring shows in Paris 
　　and just likes to have one of her American assistants be 
　　there. She’ll go to Milan first and then we’ll meet in Paris. 
　　To, you know, oversee everything.”

　　“And that American assistant has to be you, and it has to mean 
　　you’ll be missing Homecoming,” he said flatly.

　　“Well, it’s not normally the way it works. Since it’s 
　　considered a huge privilege, usually the senior assistant is 
　　the only one who gets to go, but since Emily is sick, then, 
　　yes, now I will be going. I have to leave next Tuesday, so I 
　　can’t go to Providence that weekend. I’m really, really 
　　sorry.” I moved off my chair and went to sit closer to him on 
　　the couch, but he immediately stiffened.

　　“So it’s just that simple, right? You know, I already paid for 
　　the entire room to guarantee the rate. Never mind the fact 
　　thatI rearrangedmy whole schedule to go with you that weekend. 
　　I told my mom she had to find a sitter becauseyou wanted to 
　　go. Not a big deal, though, right? Just anotherRunway 
　　obligation.” In all the years we’d spent together, I’d never 
　　seen him so angry. Even Lily looked up from her magazine long 
　　enough to excuse herself and get the hell out of the room 
　　before this turned into an all-out war.

　　I tried to curl up on his lap, but he crossed his legs and 
　　waved his hand. “Seriously, Andrea―” He called me that only 
　　when he was really annoyed. “Is all of this really worth it? 
　　Be honest with me for a second. Is it worth it to you?”

　　“All of what? Is missing a Homecoming weekend when there will 
　　be dozens more worth it to do something I’m required to do for 
　　my job? A job that is going to open doors for me I never 
　　thought possible, and sooner than I ever expected? Yes! It’s 
　　worth it.”

　　His chin dropped to his chest and for a moment I thought he 
　　was crying, but when he lifted it again, his face revealed 
　　nothing but rage.

　　“Don’t you think I’d rather go with you than go be someone’s 
　　slave twenty-four-seven for a straight week?” I shouted, 
　　forgetting entirely that Lily was somewhere in the apartment. 
　　“Can’t you stop for one second to think about the fact that I 
　　may not want to go either, but I have no choice?”

　　“No choice? You have nothingbut choices! Andy, this job isn’t 
　　just a job anymore, in case you’ve failed to notice―it’s taken 
　　over your entire life!” he yelled back, the redness in his 
　　face expanding to his neck and ears. Normally I thought this 
　　was very cute, even sexy, but tonight I just wanted to go to 
　　sleep.

　　“Alex, listen, I know―”

　　“No,you listen! Forget about me for a second, not like that’s 
　　such a stretch, but forget that we never, ever see each other 
　　anymore because of the hours you keep at work, because of your 
　　never-ending work emergencies. What about your parents? When 
　　was the last time you actually saw them? And your sister? You 
　　do realize that she just had her first baby and you haven’t 
　　even seen your own nephew yet, don’t you? Doesn’t that mean 
　　anything?” He lowered his voice and leaned in closer. I 
　　thought he might be getting ready to apologize, but he said, 
　　“What about Lily? Have you not noticed that your best friend 
　　has turned into a raging alcoholic?” I must have looked 
　　absolutely shocked, because he barreled on. “You can’t even 
　　think of saying you didn’t realize that, Andy. It’s the most 
　　obvious thing in the world.”

　　“Yes, of course she drinks. So do you and so do I and so does 
　　everyone we know. Lily’s a student, and that’s what students 
　　do, Alex. What’s so weird about that?” It sounded even more 
　　pathetic when I said it out loud, and he only shook his head. 
　　We were both quiet for a few minutes until he spoke.

　　“You just don’t get it, Andy. I’m not exactly sure how it 
　　happened, but I feel like I don’t even know you anymore. I 
　　think we need a break.”

　　“What? What are you saying? You want to break up?” I asked, 
　　realizing much too late that he was very, very serious. Alex 
　　was so understanding, so sweet, so available, that I’d begun 
　　to take for granted that he’d always be around to listen or 
　　talk me down after a long day or cheer me up when everyone 
　　else had felt free to take a swing. The only problem with all 
　　of this was that I wasn’t exactly holding up my end of the 
　　deal.

　　“No, not at all. Not break up, just take a break. I think it 
　　would help both of us if we reevaluate what we’ve got going 
　　here. You sure don’t seem happy with me lately, and I can’t 
　　say I’m thrilled with you. Maybe a little time away would be 
　　good for both of us.”

　　“Good for both of us? You think it’ll ‘help us’?” I wanted to 
　　scream at the triteness of his words, at the idea that “taking 
　　some time” would actually help draw us closer. It seemed 
　　selfish that he was doing this now, just as I was going into 
　　what I hoped was the last of my one-yearRunway sentence and 
　　mere days before I had to pull off the biggest challenge of my 
　　career. Any quick jabs of sadness or concern from a few 
　　minutes ago had been swiftly replaced with irritation. “Fine, 
　　then. Let’s ‘take a break,’ ” I said sarcastically, meanly. “A 
　　breather. Sounds like a great plan.”

　　He stared at me with those big brown eyes with a look of 
　　overwhelming surprise and hurt, and then pressed them tightly 
　　shut in an apparent effort to push away the image of my face. 
　　“OK, Andy. I’ll put you out of your obvious misery and leave 
　　now. I hope you have a great time in Paris, I really do. I’ll 
　　talk to you soon.” And before I even realized that it was 
　　actually happening, he’d kissed me on the cheek like he would 
　　Lily or my mother and walked toward the door.

　　“Alex, don’t you think we should talk about this?” I said, 
　　trying to keep my voice calm, wondering if he would actually 
　　walk out right now.

　　He turned and smiled sadly and said, “Let’s not talk any more 
　　tonight, Andy. We should’ve been talking the past few months, 
　　the pastyear, not trying to cram it all in right now. Think 
　　about everything, OK? I’ll call you in a couple weeks, when 
　　you’re back and settled. And good luck in Paris―I know you’ll 
　　be great.” He opened the door, stepped through it, and quietly 
　　closed it behind him.

　　I ran to Lily’s room so she could tell me that he was 
　　overreacting, that I had to go to Paris because it was the 
　　best thing for my future, that she didn’t have a drinking 
　　problem, that I wasn’t a bad sister for leaving the country 
　　when Jill had just had her first baby. But she was passed out 
　　on top of her covers, fully dressed, the empty cocktail glass 
　　on her bedside table. Her Toshiba laptop was open beside her 
　　on the bed, and I wondered if she’d managed to write a single 
　　word. I looked. Bravo! She’d written the heading, complete 
　　with her name, the class number, the professor’s name, and her 
　　presumably temporary version of the article’s title: “The 
　　Psychological Ramifications of Falling in Love with Your 
　　Reader.” I laughed out loud, but she didn’t stir, so I moved 
　　the computer back to her desk and set her alarm for seven and 
　　turned out the lights.

　　My Cell Phone rang as soon as I walked in my bedroom. After 
　　the initial five-second usual heart-pounding session I endured 
　　each time it rang for fear that it was Her, I flipped it open 
　　immediately, knowing it was Alex. I knew he couldn’t leave 
　　things so unfinished. This was the same guy who couldn’t fall 
　　asleep without a good-night kiss and a verbal wish for sweet 
　　dreams; there was no way he was just prancing out of here, 
　　totally fine with the suggestion that we not talk for a few 
　　weeks.

　　“Hi, baby,” I breathed, missing him already but still happy to 
　　be on the phone with him and not necessarily having to deal 
　　with everything in person right now. My head ached and my 
　　shoulders felt like they were glued to my ears, and I just 
　　wanted to hear him say that the whole thing had been a big 
　　mistake and he’d call me tomorrow. “I’m glad you called.”

　　“‘Baby’? Wow! We’re making progress, aren’t we, Andy? Better 
　　be careful or I might have to consider the possibility that 
　　you want me,” Christian said smoothly with a grin I could hear 
　　over the phone line. “I’m glad I called, too.”

　　“Oh. It’s you.”

　　“Well, that’s not the warmest welcome I’ve ever received! 
　　What’s the matter, Andy? You’ve been screening me lately, 
　　haven’t you?”

　　“Of course not,” I lied. “I’ve just had a bad day. As usual. 
　　What’s up?”

　　He laughed. “Andy, Andy, Andy. Come on now. You have no reason 
　　to be so unhappy. You’re on the fast-track to great things. 
　　Speaking of which, I’m calling to see if you wanted to come to 
　　a PEN award ceremony and reading tomorrow night. Should be 
　　lots of interesting people, and I haven’t seen you in a while. 
　　Purely professional, of course.”

　　For a girl who had read way too many “How to Know if He’s 
　　Ready to Commit” articles inCosmo, one might think the warning 
　　flags would’ve gone up on this one. And they did―I just chose 
　　to ignore them. It had been a very long day, and so I allowed 
　　myself to think―just for a few minutes―that he might, might, 
　　MIGHT actually be sincere. Screw it. It felt good to talk to a 
　　noncritical male for a few minutes, even if he did refuse to 
　　accept that I was taken. I knew I wouldn’t actually accept his 
　　invitation, but a few minutes of innocent phone flirting 
　　wouldn’t hurt anyone.

　　“Oh really?” I asked coyly. “Tell me all about it.”

　　“I’m going to list all the reasons that you should come with 
　　me, Andy, and the first one is the simplest: I know what’s 
　　good for you. Period.” God, he was arrogant. Why did I find it 
　　so endearing?

　　game on. We were off and running, and it took only a few more 
　　minutes until the trip to Paris and Lily’s nasty little vodka 
　　habit and Alex’s sad eyes faded to the background of my 
　　acknowledged-unhealthy-and-emotionally-dangerous-but-really-sexy-and-fun-nonetheless 
　　conversation with Christian.


　　16

　　It was planned that Miranda would be in Europe for a week 
　　before I was due to arrive. She settled for using some local 
　　assistants for the Milan shows―and would be arriving in Paris 
　　the same morning I was so we could work out the details of her 
　　party together, like old friends. Hah. Delta had refused to 
　　simply change the name on the ticket from Emily’s to mine, so 
　　rather than get even more frustrated and hassled than I 
　　already was, I just charged a new one. Twenty-two hundred 
　　dollars because it was fashion week and I was buying at the 
　　last minute. I paused for one ridiculous minute before forking 
　　over the corporate card number.Whatever, I thought.Miranda can 
　　spend that in a week on hair and makeup alone .

　　As Miranda’s junior assistant, I was the lowest-ranking human 
　　being atRunway . However, if access is power, then Emily and I 
　　were the two most powerful people in fashion: we determined 
　　who got meetings, when they were scheduled (early morning was 
　　always preferred because people’s makeup would be fresh and 
　　their clothes unwrinkled), and whose messages got through (if 
　　your name wasn’t on the Bulletin, you didn’t exist).

　　So when either of us needed help, the rest of the staff were 
　　obliged to pull through. Yes, of course there was something 
　　disconcerting about the realization that if we didn’t work for 
　　Miranda Priestly these same people would have no compunction 
　　in running over us with their chauffeured Town Cars. As it 
　　was, when called upon, they ran and fetched and retrieved for 
　　us like well-trained puppies.

　　Work on the current issue ground to a halt as everyone rallied 
　　to send me off to Paris adequately prepared. Three Clackers 
　　from the fashion department hastily pulled together a wardrobe 
　　that included every single item that I could conceivably 
　　require for any event Miranda could conceivably call on me to 
　　attend. By the time I left, Lucia, the fashion director, 
　　promised I would have in my possession not only an assemblage 
　　of clothing appropriate for any contingency, but also a full 
　　sketchbook complete with professionally rendered charcoal 
　　sketches depicting every imaginable way of pairing the 
　　aforementioned clothing in order to maximize style and 
　　minimize embarrassment. In other words: leave nothing to my 
　　own selection or pairing, and I’d quite possibly have a shot 
　　in hell―albeit slim―of looking presentable.

　　Might I need to accompany Miranda to a bistro and stand, 
　　mummylike, in the corner while she sipped a glass of Bordeaux? 
　　A pair of cuffed, charcoal gray Theory pants with a black silk 
　　turtleneck sweater by Celine. Attend the tennis club where 
　　she’d receive her private lessons so that I could fetch water 
　　and, if required, white scarves in case sheschvitzed ? A 
　　head-to-toe athletic outfit complete with bootleg workout 
　　pants, zip-up hooded jacket (cropped to show off my tummy, 
　　natch), a $185 wife-beater to wear under it, and suede 
　　sneakers―all by Prada. And what if maybe―just maybe―I actually 
　　did make it to the front row of one of those shows like 
　　everyone swore I would? The options were limitless. My 
　　favorite so far (and it was still only late afternoon on 
　　Monday) was a pleated school-girl skirt by Anna Sui, with a 
　　very sheer and very frilly white Miu Miu blouse, paired with a 
　　particularly naughty-looking pair of midcalf Christian 
　　Laboutin boots and topped with a Katayone Adeli leather blazer 
　　so fitted it bordered on obscene. My Express jeans and Franco 
　　Sarto loafers had been buried under a film of dust in my 
　　closet for months now, and I had to admit I didn’t miss them.

　　I also discovered that Allison, the beauty editor, did, in 
　　fact, deserve her title by literallybeing the beauty industry. 
　　Within twenty-four hours of being “put on notice” that I would 
　　be needing some makeup and more than a few tips, she had 
　　created the Be-All, End-All Cosmetic Catchall. Included in the 
　　decidedly oversize Burberry “toiletry case” (it actually more 
　　closely resembled a wheeled suitcase slightly larger than 
　　those approved by the airlines for carry-on) was every 
　　imaginable type of shadow, lotion, gloss, cream, liner, and 
　　type of makeup. Lipsticks came in matte, high-shine, 
　　long-lasting, and clear. Six shades of mascara―ranging in 
　　color from a light blue to a “pouty black”―were accompanied by 
　　an eyelash curler and two eyelash combs in case of (gasp!) 
　　clumps.

　　Powders, which appeared to account for half of all the 
　　products and fixed/accentuated/accented/hid the eyelids, the 
　　skin tone, and the cheeks, had a color scheme more complex and 
　　subtler than a painter’s palette: some were meant to bronze, 
　　others to highlight, and still others to pout, plump, or pale. 
　　I had the choice whether to add that healthy blush to my face 
　　in the form of a liquid, solid, powder, or a combination 
　　thereof. The foundation was the most impressive of all: it was 
　　as if someone had managed to remove an actual sample of skin 
　　directly from my face and custom-mix a pint or two of the 
　　stuff. Whether it “added sheen” or “covered blemishes,” every 
　　single solitary little bottle matched my skin tone better 
　　than, well, my own skin. Packed in a slightly smaller matching 
　　plaid case were the supplies: cotton balls, cotton squares, 
　　Q-tips, sponges, somewhere in the vicinity of two dozen 
　　different-size application brushes, washcloths, two different 
　　types of eye makeup remover (moisturizing and oil-free), and 
　　no less than twelve―TWELVE―kinds of moisturizer (facial, body, 
　　deep-conditioning, with SPF 15, glimmering, tinted, scented, 
　　nonscented, hypoallergenic, with alpha-hydroxy, antibacterial, 
　　and―just in case that nasty October Parisian sun got the best 
　　of me―with aloe vera).

　　Tucked in a side pocket of the smaller case were legal-size 
　　pieces of paper with preprinted faces rendered on each one, 
　　enlarged to fit the page. Each face bragged an impressive 
　　makeover: Allison had applied the actual makeup she’d included 
　　in the kit to the paper faces. One face was eerily labeled 
　　“Relaxed Evening Glamour” but had a caveat under it in big, 
　　bold marker that read: NOT FOR BLACK-TIE!! TOO CASUAL!! The 
　　nonformal face had a light covering of the matte foundation 
　　under a slight brush of bronzing powder, a light dab of liquid 
　　or “crème” blush, some very sexy, dark-lined and heavily 
　　shadowed eyelids accented by jet black mascara’d lashes, and 
　　what appeared to be a quick, casual swipe of high-gloss lip 
　　color. When I’d mumbled under my breath to Allison that this 
　　would be utterly impossible for me to recreate, she looked 
　　exasperated.

　　“Well, hopefully you won’t have to,” she said in a voice that 
　　sounded so taxed, I thought she might collapse under the 
　　weight of my ignorance.

　　“No? Then why do I have nearly two dozen ‘faces’ suggesting 
　　different ways to use all this stuff?”

　　Her withering glance was worthy of Miranda.

　　“Andrea. Be serious. This is for emergencies only, in case 
　　Miranda asks you to go somewhere with her at the last minute, 
　　or if your hair and makeup person can’t make it. Oh, that 
　　reminds me, let me show you the hair stuff I packed.”

　　As Allison demonstrated how to use four different types of 
　　round brushes to blow my hair straight, I tried to make sense 
　　of what she’d just said. I would have a hair and makeup 
　　person, too? I hadn’t arranged for anyone to do me when I’d 
　　booked all of Miranda’s people, so who had? I had to ask.

　　“The Paris office,” Allison replied with a sigh. “You’re 
　　representingRunway, you know, and Miranda is very sensitive to 
　　that. You’ll be attending some of the most glamorous events in 
　　the world alongside Miranda Priestly. You don’t think you 
　　could achieve the right look on your own, do you?”

　　“No, of course not. It’s definitely better that I have 
　　professional help for this. Thank you.”

　　Then Allison kept me cornered an additional two hours until 
　　she was satisfied that if any of the fourteen hair and makeup 
　　appointments I had scheduled over the course of the week fell 
　　through, I wouldn’t humiliate our boss by smearing the mascara 
　　across my lips or shaving the sides of my head and spiking the 
　　center into a mohawk. When we were through, I thought I’d 
　　finally get a moment to race down to the dining room and grab 
　　some calorie-enriched soup, but Allison picked up Emily’s 
　　extension―her old phone line―and dialed Stef in the 
　　accessories department.

　　“Hi, I’m done with her and she’s here right now. You want to 
　　come over?”

　　“Wait! I need to go get lunch before Miranda comes back!”

　　Allison rolled her eyes just like Emily. I wondered if it was 
　　something about that particular position that inspired such 
　　expert demonstrations of irritation. “Fine. No, no, I was 
　　talking to Andrea,” she said into the phone, raising her 
　　eyebrows at me―surprise, surprise―just like Emily. “It seems 
　　that she’shungry . I know. Yes, I know. I told her that, but 
　　she seems intent on . . .eating .”

　　I walked out of the office and picked up a large cup of cream 
　　of broccoli with cheddar cheese and returned within three 
　　minutes to find Miranda sitting at her desk, holding the phone 
　　receiver away from her face like it was covered in leeches. 
　　She was due to fly to Milan that very evening but I wasn’t 
　　sure I’d survive to see it happen.

　　“The phone rings, Andrea, but when I pick it up―because you’re 
　　apparently not interested in doing so―no one’s there. Can you 
　　explain this phenomenon?” she asked.

　　Of course I could explain it, just not to her. On the rare 
　　occasion that Miranda was in her office alone, she sometimes 
　　picked up the phone when it rang. Naturally callers were so 
　　shocked to hear her voice on the other end that they promptly 
　　hung up. No one was actually prepared tospeak with her when 
　　they called, since the likelihood of being put through was 
　　next to nil. I’d gotten dozens of e-mails from editors or 
　　assistants informing me―as if I didn’t know―that Miranda was 
　　answering the phone again. “Where are you guys???” The 
　　panicked missives would read, one after another. “She’s 
　　answering her own phone!!!!”

　　I mumbled something about how I, too, received hang-ups every 
　　now and then, but Miranda had already lost interest. She was 
　　peering not at me but at my cup of soup. Some of the creamy 
　　green fluid was dripping slowly down the side. Her gaze turned 
　　to one of disgust when she realized I was not only holding 
　　something edible, but that I had clearly planned to consume it 
　　as well.

　　“Dispose of that immediately!” she barked from fifteen feet 
　　away. “The smell of it alone is enough to make me ill.”

　　I dropped the offending soup in the garbage can and gazed 
　　wistfully after the lost nourishment before her voice jerked 
　　me back to reality.

　　“I’m ready for the run-throughs!” she screeched, settling back 
　　into her chair more easily now that the food she’d spotted 
　　atRunway had been discarded. “And the moment we’re through 
　　here, call the features meeting.”

　　Each word caused another adrenaline surge; since I was never 
　　sure what exactly she’d be requesting, I was never sure if I’d 
　　be able to handle it or not. Since it was Emily’s job to 
　　schedule the run-throughs and the weekly meetings, I had to 
　　race over to her desk and check her appointment book. In the 
　　three o’clock slot she had scribbled:Sedona Shoot run-through, 
　　Lucia/Helen . I jabbed Lucia’s extension and spoke as soon as 
　　she picked up the phone.

　　“She’s ready,” I stated, like a military commander. Helen, 
　　Lucia’s assistant, hung up without saying a word, and I knew 
　　she and Lucia were already halfway to the office. If they 
　　didn’t arrive within twenty to twenty-five seconds, I would be 
　　sent out to hunt them down and remind them in person―just in 
　　case they might have forgotten―that when I’d called thirty 
　　seconds before and said that Miranda was ready right then, I 
　　meant rightthen . Generally this was a mere annoyance, yet 
　　another reason why the enforced footwear of spiky stilettos 
　　made life even more miserable. Running through the office, 
　　frantically searching for someone who was most likely hiding 
　　from Miranda was never fun, but it was only really miserable 
　　when that person happened to be in the bathroom. Whatever one 
　　does in a men’s or ladies’ room, however, is no excuse for not 
　　being available at the exact moment your presence is expected, 
　　and so I had to charge right in―sometimes checking underneath 
　　the stalls for recognizable footwear―and politely ask in 
　　whatever humiliated way I could manage that they finish up and 
　　head to Miranda’s office. Immediately.

　　Luckily for everyone involved, Helen arrived within seconds, 
　　pushing an overflowing, off-kilter wheeled rack in front of 
　　her and pulling another behind her. She hesitated briefly 
　　outside Miranda’s French door before she received one of 
　　Miranda’s imperceptible nods and then dragged the racks 
　　through the thick carpeting.

　　“This is all of it? Two racks?” Miranda asked, barely looking 
　　up from the copy she was reading.

　　Helen was clearly surprised at being addressed, since, as a 
　　rule, Miranda didn’t speak to other people’s assistants. But 
　　Lucia hadn’t shown up with her own racks yet, so there was 
　　little choice.

　　“Um, uh, no. Lucia will be here in just a moment. She has the 
　　other two. Would you like me to, uh, begin showing you what 
　　we’ve called in?” Helen asked nervously as she pulled her 
　　ribbed tank top down over her prairie skirt.

　　“No.”

　　And then: “Ahn-dre-ah! Find Lucia. By my watch it’s three 
　　o’clock. If she’s not prepared, then I have better things to 
　　do than sit here and wait for her.” Which wasn’t exactly true, 
　　since it appeared she hadn’t yet stopped reading copy and it 
　　was now only approximately thirty-five seconds since I’d made 
　　the initial phone call. But I wasn’t about to point this out.

　　“No need, Miranda, I’m right here,” sang a breathless Lucia, 
　　herself pushing and pulling racks past me just as I stood to 
　　begin the search. “So sorry. We were waiting for one last coat 
　　from the YSL people.”

　　She arranged the racks, which were organized by clothing type 
　　(shirts, outerwear, pants/skirts, and dresses) in a 
　　half-circle in front of Miranda’s desk and gave the signal for 
　　Helen to leave. Miranda and Lucia then went through each item, 
　　one by one, and bickered over its place or lack thereof in the 
　　upcoming fashion shoot that was to take place in Sedona, 
　　Arizona. Lucia was pushing for an “urban cowgirl chic” look, 
　　which she thought would play out perfectly against a backdrop 
　　of the red-rock mountains, but Miranda kept announcing snidely 
　　that she’d prefer “just chic,” since “cowgirl chic” was 
　　clearly an oxymoron. Maybe she’d had her fill of “cowgirl 
　　chic” at B-DAD’s brother’s party. I managed to tune them out 
　　until Miranda called my name, this time ordering me to call in 
　　the accessories people for their run-through.

　　Immediately I checked Emily’s book again, but it was just as I 
　　thought: there was no accessories run-through scheduled. 
　　Praying that Emily had simply forgotten to put it in the book, 
　　I called Stef and told her Miranda was ready for the Sedona 
　　run-through.

　　No such luck. They weren’t scheduled for their run-through 
　　until late afternoon the following day, and at least a quarter 
　　of the things they needed hadn’t been delivered yet from their 
　　PR companies.

　　“Impossible. Can’t do it,” announced Stef, sounding much less 
　　confident than her words implied.

　　“Well, what the hell do you expect me to tell her?” I 
　　whispered back.

　　“Tell her the truth: the run-through wasn’t supposed to take 
　　place until tomorrow and a lot of the stuff isn’t here. I 
　　mean, seriously! Right now we’re still waiting for one evening 
　　bag, one clutch, three different fringed purses, four pairs of 
　　shoes, two necklaces, three―”

　　“OK, OK, I’ll tell her. But wait by the phone and pick up if I 
　　call you back. And if I were you, I’d get ready. I’m betting 
　　she doesn’t really care when it was scheduled for.”

　　Stef hung up on me without another word and I approached 
　　Miranda’s doors and waited patiently for her to acknowledge 
　　me. When she looked in my general direction and waited, I 
　　said, “Miranda, I just spoke with Stef and she said that since 
　　the run-through wasn’t scheduled until tomorrow, they’re still 
　　waiting for quite a few items. But they should all be here 
　　by―”

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, I simply cannot visualize how these models will 
　　look in these clothes without shoes or bags or jewelry and by 
　　tomorrow I’ll be in Italy. Tell Stef I want her to give me a 
　　run-through of whatever she’s got and be prepared to show me 
　　photos of whatever isn’t here yet!” She turned back to Lucia 
　　and together they returned to the racks.

　　Conveying this to Stef gave new meaning to “don’t shoot the 
　　messenger.” She freaked.

　　“I cannot fucking pull a run-through together in thirty 
　　seconds, do you understand me? It’s fucking impossible! Four 
　　of my five assistants aren’t here, and the only one who is 
　　here is a complete fucking idiot. Andrea, what the fuck am I 
　　going to do?” She was hysterical, but there wasn’t much room 
　　for negotiation.

　　“OK, great then,” I said sweetly, eyeing Miranda, who had a 
　　knack of hearing everything. “I’ll tell Miranda you’ll be 
　　right here.” I hung up before she dissolved into tears.

　　I wasn’t surprised to see Stef arrive two and a half minutes 
　　later with her one fucking idiot accessories assistant, a 
　　fashion assistant she’d borrowed, and James, also borrowed 
　　from beauty, all looking terrified as they carried oversize 
　　wicker baskets. They stood cowering by my desk until Miranda 
　　gave another imperceptible nod, at which point they all 
　　shuffled forward for the genuflection exercises. Since Miranda 
　　obviously refused to leave her office―ever―she required that 
　　all the overflowing racks of clothes and carts full of shoes 
　　and baskets brimming over with accessories must be schlepped 
　　to her.

　　When the accessories people finally managed to lay out their 
　　wares in neat rows on the carpet for her to inspect, Miranda’s 
　　office morphed into a Bedouin bazaar―one that just so happens 
　　to look more Madison Avenue than Sharm-el-Sheik. One editor 
　　was presenting her with $2,000 snakeskin belts while another 
　　tried to sell her a large Kelly bag. A third hawked a short 
　　Fendi cocktail dress, while someone else tried to sell her on 
　　the merits of chiffon. Stef had managed to assemble a 
　　near-perfect run-through with only thirty seconds’ notice and 
　　a whole lot of pieces missing; I saw she had filled the gaps 
　　with things from past photo shoots, explaining to Miranda that 
　　the accessories they were still waiting for were similar but 
　　even better. They were all masters at what they do, but 
　　Miranda was the ultimate. She was the ever-aloof consumer, 
　　coolly moving from one gorgeous stall to the next, never 
　　feigning any show of interest. When she finally, blessedly, 
　　did decide, she pointed and commanded (much like a judge at a 
　　dog show, “Bob, she’s chosen the Border Collie . . .”), and 
　　the editors nodded obsequiously (“Yes, excellent choice,” “Oh, 
　　definitely, the perfect choice”) and they wrapped up their 
　　wares and scuttled back to their respective departments before 
　　she inevitably changed her mind.

　　The whole hellish ordeal only took a few minutes, but by the 
　　time it was over, we were all exhausted from anxiety. She’d 
　　already announced earlier in the day that she’d be leaving 
　　early, around four, to spend a couple hours with the girls 
　　before the big trip, so I canceled the features meeting, to 
　　the relief of the entire department. At precisely 3:58P .M. 
　　she began packing her bag to leave, a not-so-strenuous 
　　activity, since I’d be bringing anything of any heft or 
　　significance to her apartment later on that evening in time 
　　for her flight. Basically, it involved tossing her Gucci 
　　wallet and her Motorola Cell Phone into that Fendi bag that 
　　she kept abusing. The past few weeks, the $10,000 beauty had 
　　been serving as Cassidy’s school bag and many of the beads―in 
　　addition to one of the handles―had snapped off. Miranda had 
　　dropped it on my desk one day and ordered me to have it fixed 
　　or, if it was impossible to fix, to just throw out. I’d 
　　proudly resisted all temptation to tell her the bag was 
　　unfixable so I could keep it and instead had a leatherworker 
　　repair it for her for a mere twenty-five dollars.

　　When she finally walked out, I instinctively reached for the 
　　phone to call Alex and whine about my day. It wasn’t until I’d 
　　dialed half of his number that I remembered we were taking a 
　　break. It hit me that this would be the first day in more than 
　　three years that we wouldn’t talk. I sat with the phone in my 
　　hand, staring at an e-mail he’d sent the day before, one that 
　　he’d signed “love,” and wondered if I’d made a horrible 
　　mistake in agreeing to this break. I dialed again, this time 
　　ready to tell him that we should talk about everything, figure 
　　out where we’d gone wrong, that I take responsibility for the 
　　part I’d played in the slow and steady fading of our 
　　relationship. But before it even had a chance to ring, Stef 
　　was standing over my desk with the Accessories War Plan for my 
　　Paris trip, pumped up from her run-through with Miranda. There 
　　were shoes and bags and belts and jewelry and hosiery and 
　　sunglasses to discuss, so I replaced the receiver and tried to 
　　focus on her instructions.

　　Logically, it would seem that a seven-hour flight in steerage 
　　decked out in a pair of skintight leather pants, open-toe 
　　strappy sandals, and a blazer over a tank top would be the 
　　utmost in hellish travel experiences. Not so. The seven hours 
　　in flight were the most relaxing I could remember. Since 
　　Miranda and I were both flying to Paris at the same time on 
　　different flights―she from Milan and me from New York―it 
　　appeared I’d stumbled on the single situation where she could 
　　not call me for seven straight hours. For one blessed day, my 
　　inaccessibility wasn’t my fault.

　　For reasons I still didn’t understand, my parents hadn’t been 
　　nearly as thrilled as I thought they’d be when I’d called to 
　　tell them about the trip.

　　“Oh, really?” my mother asked in that special way of hers that 
　　implied so much more than those two little words really meant. 
　　“You’re going to Paris now?”

　　“What do you mean, ‘now’?”

　　“Well, it just doesn’t seem like the best time to be jetting 
　　off to Europe, is all,” she said vaguely, although I could 
　　tell that an avalanche of Jewish-mother guilt was ready to 
　　begin its slide in my direction.

　　“And why is that? Whenwould be a good time?”

　　“Don’t get upset, Andy. It’s just that we haven’t seen you in 
　　months―not that we’re complaining, Dad and I both understand 
　　how demanding your job is―but don’t you want to see your new 
　　nephew? He’s a few months old already and you haven’t even met 
　　him yet!”

　　“Mom! Don’t make me feel guilty. I’m dying to see Isaac, but 
　　you know I can’t just―”

　　“You know Dad and I will pay for your ticket to Houston, 
　　right?”

　　“Yes! You’ve told me four hundred times. I know it and I 
　　appreciate it, but it’s not the money. I can’t get any time 
　　off work and now with Emily out, I can’t just up and 
　　leave―even on weekends. Does it make sense to you to fly 
　　across the country only to have to come back if Miranda calls 
　　me on Saturday morning to pick up her dry cleaning? Does it?”

　　“Of course not, Andy, I just thought―we just thought―that you 
　　might be able to visit them in the next couple weeks, because 
　　Miranda was going to be away and all, and if you were going to 
　　fly out there, then Dad and I would go also. But now you’re 
　　going to Paris.”

　　She said it in the way that implied what she was really 
　　thinking. “But now you’re going to Paris” translated to “But 
　　now you’re jetting off to Europe to escape all of your family 
　　obligations.”

　　“Mother, let me make something very, very clear here. I am not 
　　going on vacation. I have not chosen to go to Paris rather 
　　than meet my baby nephew. It’s not my decision at all, as you 
　　probably know but are refusing to accept. It’s really very 
　　simple: I go to Paris with Miranda in three days for one week, 
　　or I get fired. Do you see a choice here? Because if so, I’d 
　　love to hear it.”

　　She was quiet for a moment before she said, “No, of course 
　　not, honey. You know we understand. I just hope―well, I just 
　　hope that you’re happy with the way things are going.”

　　“What’s that supposed to mean?” I asked nastily.

　　“Nothing, nothing,” she rushed to say. “It doesn’t mean 
　　anything other than just what I said: your dad and I only care 
　　that you’re happy, and it seems that you’ve really been, um, 
　　well, uh, pushing yourself lately. Is everything OK?”

　　I softened a bit since she was clearly trying so hard. “Yeah, 
　　Mom, everything’s fine. I’m not happy to be going to Paris, 
　　just so you know. It’s going to be a week of sheer hell, 
　　twenty-four-seven. But my year will be up soon, and I can put 
　　this kind of living behind me.”

　　“I know, sweetie, I know it’s been a tough year for you. I 
　　just hope this all ends up being worth it for you. That’s 
　　all.”

　　“I know. So do I.”

　　We hung up on good terms, but I couldn’t shake the feeling 
　　that my own parents were disappointed in me.

　　The baggage claim at de Gaulle was a nightmare, but I found 
　　the elegantly dressed driver who was waving a sign with my 
　　name on it when I exited customs, and the moment he closed his 
　　own door, he handed me a Cell Phone.

　　“Ms. Priestly asked that you call her upon arrival. I took the 
　　liberty of programming the hotel’s number into the automatic 
　　dialing. She’s in the Coco Chanel suite.”

　　“Um, oh, OK. Thanks. I guess I’ll call right now,” I announced 
　　rather unnecessarily.

　　But before I could press the star key and the number one, the 
　　phone bleated and flashed a frightening red color. If the 
　　driver hadn’t been watching me expectantly I would have muted 
　　the ring and pretended I hadn’t yet seen it, but I was left 
　　with the distinct feeling that he had been ordered to keep a 
　　close eye on me. Something about his expression suggested that 
　　it was not in my best interest to ignore that call.

　　“Hello? This is Andrea Sachs,” I said as professionally as 
　　possible, already making over/under bets with myself as to the 
　　chance it was anyone besides Miranda.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah! What time does your watch read at this moment?”

　　Was this a trick question? A preface to accusing me of being 
　　late?

　　“Um, let me see. Actually, it says that it’s five-fifteen in 
　　the morning, but obviously I haven’t switched it yet to Paris 
　　time. Therefore, my watch should read that it’s 
　　eleven-fifteenA .M.” I said cheerily, hoping to start off the 
　　first conversation of our interminable trip on as high a note 
　　as I dared.

　　“Thank you for that never-ending narrative, Ahn-dre-ah. And 
　　may I ask what, exactly, you’ve been doing for the past 
　　thirty-five minutes?”

　　“Well, Miranda, the flight landed a few minutes late and then 
　　I still had―”

　　“Because according to the itineraryyou created for me, I’m 
　　reading that your flight arrived at ten-thirty-five this 
　　morning.”

　　“Yes, that’s when it was scheduled to arrive, but you see―”

　　“I’ll not have you tell me what I see, Ahn-dre-ah. That is 
　　most certainly not acceptable behavior for the next week, do 
　　you understand me?”

　　“Yes, of course. I’m sorry.” My heart began pounding what felt 
　　like a million beats a minute, and I could feel my face grow 
　　hot with humiliation. Humiliation at being spoken to that way, 
　　but more than anything, my own shame in pandering to it. I had 
　　just apologized―most sincerely―to someone for not being able 
　　to make my international flight land at the correct time and 
　　then for not being savvy enough to figure out how to avoid 
　　French customs entirely.

　　I pressed my face rather uncouthly against the window and 
　　watched as the limo weaved its way through Paris’s bustling 
　　streets. The women seemed so much taller here, the men so much 
　　more genteel, and just about everyone was beautifully dressed, 
　　thin, and regal in their stance. I’d only been to Paris once 
　　before, but living out of a backpack in a hostel on the wrong 
　　side of town didn’t quite have the same feel as watching the 
　　chic little clothing boutiques and adorable sidewalk cafés 
　　from the backseat of a limousine.I could get used to this, I 
　　thought, as the driver turned around to show me where I might 
　　find a few bottles of water if I was so inclined.

　　When the car pulled up to the hotel entrance, a 
　　distinguished-looking gentleman wearing what I guessed was a 
　　custom-made suit opened the back door for me.

　　“Mademoiselle Sachs, what a pleasure to finally meet you. I am 
　　Gerard Renaud.” His voice was smooth and confident, and his 
　　silver hair and deeply lined face indicated he was much older 
　　than I’d pictured when I spoke to the concierge over the 
　　phone.

　　“Monsieur Renaud, it’s great to finally meet you!” Suddenly 
　　all I wanted to do was crawl into a nice, soft bed and sleep 
　　off my jet lag, but Renaud quickly quashed my hopes.

　　“Mademoiselle Andrea, Madame Priestly would like to see you in 
　　her room immediately. Before you’ve settled into yours, I’m 
　　afraid.” He had an apologetic expression on his face, and for 
　　a brief moment I felt sorrier for him than I did for myself. 
　　Clearly he didn’t enjoy conveying this news.

　　“That’s fucking great,” I muttered, before noticing how 
　　distressed this made Monsieur Renaud. I plastered on a winning 
　　smile and began again. “Please excuse me, it was a terribly 
　　long flight. Will someone please tell me where I may find 
　　Miranda?”

　　“Of course, mademoiselle. She is in her suite and from what I 
　　can gather, very eager to see you.” When I looked over at 
　　Monsieur Renaud I thought I detected a slight eye-roll and 
　　even though I’d always found him oppressively proper over the 
　　phone, I reconsidered. Although he was much too professional 
　　to show it, never mind actually say anything, I considered 
　　that he might loathe Miranda as much as I did. Not because of 
　　any real proof I had, but simply because it was impossible to 
　　imagine anyonenot hating her.

　　The elevator opened and Monsieur Renaud smiled and ushered me 
　　inside. He said something in French to the bellman who was 
　　escorting me upstairs. Renaud bid me adieu and the bellman led 
　　me to Miranda’s suite. He knocked on the door and then fled, 
　　leaving me to face Miranda alone.

　　I briefly wondered if Miranda herself would answer the door, 
　　but it was impossible to imagine. In the eleven months I’d 
　　been letting myself in and out of her apartment, I’d yet to 
　　catch her doing anything that even resembled work, including 
　　such pedestrian tasks as answering the phone, removing a 
　　jacket from a closet, or pouring a glass of water. It was as 
　　if her every day wasShabbat and she was once again the 
　　observant Jew, and I was, of course, herShabbes goy .

　　A pretty, uniformed maid opened the door and ushered me 
　　inside, her sad eyes moist and staring directly at the floor.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah!” I heard from somewhere in the deep recesses of 
　　the most magnificent living room I’d ever seen. “Ahn-dre-ah, 
　　I’ll need my Chanel suit pressed for tonight, since it was 
　　practically ruined with wrinkles on the flight over. You’d 
　　think the Concorde would know how to handle luggage, but my 
　　things look dreadful. Also, call Horace Mann and confirm that 
　　the girls made it to school. You’ll be doing that every day―I 
　　just don’t trust that Annabelle. Make sure you speak to both 
　　Caroline and Cassidy each night and write out a list of their 
　　Homework assignments and upcoming exams. I’ll expect a written 
　　report in the morning, right before breakfast. Oh, and get 
　　Senator Schumer on the phone immediately. It’s urgent. Lastly, 
　　I need you to contact that idiot Renuad and tell him I expect 
　　him to supply me with competent staff during my stay, and if 
　　that’s too difficult I’m sure the general manager would be 
　　able to assist me. That dumb girl he sent me is mentally 
　　challenged.”

　　My eyes swiveled to the sorrowful girl who was currently 
　　cowering in the foyer, looking as fearful as a cornered 
　　hamster as she trembled and tried not to cry. I had to assume 
　　she understood English, so I shot her my best sympathetic 
　　look, but she just continued to shake. I looked around the 
　　room and tried desperately to remember everything Miranda had 
　　just rattled off.

　　“Will do,” I called in the general direction of her voice, 
　　past the baby grand piano and the seventeen separate flower 
　　arrangements that had been lovingly placed around the 
　　house-size suite. “I’ll be back in just a moment with 
　　everything you’ve asked for.” I quietly berated myself for 
　　ending a sentence with a preposition and took one last look 
　　around the magnificent room. It was, undoubtedly, the 
　　plushest, most luxurious place I’d ever seen, with its brocade 
　　curtains, thick, cream-colored carpeting, richly woven damask 
　　bedspread on the king-size bed, and gold painted figurines 
　　tucked discreetly on mahogany shelves and tables. Only a 
　　flat-screen TV and a sleek, silver stereo system gave any 
　　indication that the entire place hadn’t been created and 
　　designed in the previous century by highly skilled craftsmen 
　　plying their trade.

　　I ducked past the quaking maid and into the hallway. The 
　　terrified bellman had reappeared.

　　“Could you show me to my room, please?” I asked as kindly as I 
　　could, but he clearly thought that I would be abusing him as 
　　well, and so once again he scurried ahead of me.

　　“Here, mademoiselle, I hope this is acceptable.”

　　About twenty yards down the hall was a door without a separate 
　　number on it. It opened to a minisuite, nearly an exact 
　　replica of Miranda’s but with a smaller living room and a 
　　queen-size bed instead of a king. A large mahogany desk 
　　outfitted with a multiline corporate-style phone, sleek 
　　desktop computer, laser printer, scanner, and fax machine had 
　　taken the place of the baby grand piano, but otherwise the 
　　rooms were remarkably similar in their rich, soothing décor.

　　“Miss, this door leads to the private hallway connecting your 
　　room and Ms. Priestly’s,” he explained as he moved to open the 
　　door.

　　“No! It’s fine, I don’t need to see it. Just knowing it’s 
　　there is good enough.” I glanced at the engraved nametag 
　　placed discreetly on the pocket of his well-pressed uniform 
　　shirt. “Thank you, uh, Stephan.” I rooted around in my bag for 
　　cash to tip him but realized that I’d never thought to change 
　　my American dollars to euros and hadn’t yet stopped at an ATM. 
　　“Oh, I’m sorry, I, uh, only have American dollars. Is that 
　　OK?”

　　His face flushed crimson and he began apologizing profusely. 
　　“Oh, no, miss, please do not worry about such things. Ms. 
　　Priestly takes care of these details when she departs. 
　　However, since you will be needing local currency when you 
　　leave the hotel, allow me to show you this.” He walked over to 
　　the behemoth of a desk, slid open the top drawer, and handed 
　　me an envelope with FrenchRunway ’s logo on it. Inside was a 
　　pile of euro bills, about 4,000 American dollars’ worth in 
　　all. The note, scribbled by Briget Jardin, the editor in chief 
　　who’d borne the brunt of planning and scheduling for both this 
　　trip and Miranda’s upcoming party, read:

　　Andrea, darling, delighted to have you join us! Please find 
　　enclosed euros for your use while in Paris. I’ve spoken with 
　　Monsieur Renaud and he will be on call for Miranda twenty-four 
　　hours a day. See below for a listing of his work and personal 
　　numbers, as well as the numbers for the hotel’s chef, physical 
　　fitness trainer, director of transportation, and, of course, 
　　the general manager. They are all familiar with Miranda’s 
　　stays during the shows and so there should be no problems. Of 
　　course, I may always be reached at work or, if necessary, by 
　　cell, Home phone, fax, or pager if either of you requires 
　　anything at all. If I don’t see you before Saturday’s big 
　　soiree, I’ll look forward to meeting you there. Lots of Love, 
　　Briget

　　Folded on a sheet ofRunway stationery and tucked underneath 
　　the cash was a list of nearly a hundred phone numbers, 
　　encompassing everything one could need in Paris, from a chic 
　　florist to an emergency surgeon. These same numbers were 
　　repeated on the last page of the detailed itinerary I’d 
　　created for Miranda using information Briget had updated daily 
　　and faxed over, so as of this moment there didn’t appear to be 
　　a single contingency―short of an all-out world war―that would 
　　prevent Miranda Priestly from viewing the spring line with the 
　　least possible amount of stress, anxiety, and concern.

　　“Thank you so much, Stephan. This is most helpful.” I peeled 
　　off a few bills for him anyway, but he courteously pretended 
　　not to see it and ducked back into the hallway. I was pleased 
　　to see that he appeared significantly less terrorized than he 
　　had just a few moments earlier.

　　I somehow managed to find the people she had asked for and 
　　figured I had a few minutes to rest my head on the 
　　four-hundred-thread-count pillowcase, but the phone rang the 
　　moment I closed my eyes.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, come to my room immediately,” she barked before 
　　slamming down the phone.

　　“Yes, of course, Miranda, thank you for asking so nicely. It’d 
　　be my pleasure,” I said to absolutely nobody. I heaved my 
　　jet-lagged body off the bed and concentrated on not getting a 
　　heel stuck in the carpeted hallway that connected my room to 
　　hers. Once again, a maid answered the door when I knocked.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah! One of Briget’s assistants just rang me to see 
　　how long my speech is for today’s brunch,” she announced. She 
　　was paging through a copy ofWomen’s Wear Daily that someone 
　　from the office―probably Allison, who knew the drill from her 
　　tenure in Miranda’s office―had faxed earlier, and two 
　　beautiful men were working on her hair and makeup. A cheese 
　　plate sat on the antique table beside her.

　　Speech? What speech? The only thing besides shows that was on 
　　the itinerary today was some sort of awards luncheon that 
　　Miranda planned to spend her usual fifteen minutes at before 
　　bolting out of sheer boredom.

　　“I’m sorry. Did you say a speech?”

　　“I did.” She carefully closed the paper, calmly folded it in 
　　half, and then tossed it angrily to the floor, narrowly 
　　missing one of the men who knelt in front of her. “Why the 
　　hell was I not informed that I’d be receiving some nonsense 
　　award at today’s luncheon?” she hissed, her face contorting 
　　with a hatred I’d never seen before. Displeasure? Sure. 
　　Dissatisfaction? All the time. Annoyance, frustration, 
　　generalized unHappiness? Of course, every minute of every day. 
　　But I’d never seen her look so downrightpissed off .

　　“Um, Miranda, I’m so sorry, but it was actually Briget’s 
　　office that RSVP’d you to the event today, and they never―”

　　“Stop speaking. Stop speaking this instant! All you ever offer 
　　me are excuses.You are my assistant,you are the person I 
　　designated to work things out in Paris,you are the one who 
　　should be keeping me abreast of these things.” She was nearly 
　　shouting now. One of the makeup guys asked softly in English 
　　if we would like a moment alone, but Miranda ignored him 
　　entirely. “It’s noon right now and I’ll be needing to leave 
　　here in forty-five minutes. I expect a short, succinct, and 
　　articulate speech legibly typed and waiting in my room. If you 
　　cannot accomplish this, see yourself Home.Permanently . That’s 
　　all.”

　　I fled down the hallway faster than I’d ever run in heels and 
　　whipped open my international Cell Phone before I’d made it 
　　into my room. It was nearly impossible to dial Briget’s work 
　　number since my hands were shaking so badly, but somehow the 
　　call went through. One of her assistants answered.

　　“I need Briget!” I shrieked, my voice breaking when I 
　　pronounced her name. “Where is she?Where is she? I need to 
　　talk to her.Now! ”

　　The girl was momentarily shocked into silence. “Andrea? Is 
　　that you?”

　　“Yes, it’s me and I need Briget. It’s an emergency―where the 
　　hell is she?”

　　“She’s at a show, but don’t worry, she always has her Cell 
　　Phone on. Are you at the hotel? I’ll have her call you right 
　　back.”

　　The phone on the desk rang a mere few seconds later, but it 
　　felt like a week. “Andrea,” she lilted in her lovely French 
　　accent. “What is it, dear? Monique said you were hysterical.”

　　“Hysterical? Damn right I’m hysterical! Briget, how could you 
　　do this to me? Your office made the arrangements for this 
　　fucking luncheon and no one bothered to tell me that she is 
　　not only receiving an award but also expected to give a 
　　speech?”

　　“Andrea, calm down. I’m sure we told―”

　　“And I have to write it! Are you listening to me? I have 
　　forty-five fucking minutes to write an acceptance speech for 
　　an award I know nothing about in a language I don’t speak. Or 
　　I’m finished. What am I going to do?”

　　“All right, relax, I’m going to walk you through this. First 
　　of all, the ceremony is right there, at the Ritz, in one of 
　　the salons.”

　　“The what? Which salon?” I hadn’t had a chance to look around 
　　the hotel yet, but I was reasonably sure there weren’t any 
　　pubs in the place.

　　“It is French for, oh, what do you call them? Meeting rooms. 
　　So, she will only need to go downstairs. It is for the French 
　　Council on Fashion, an organization here in Paris that always 
　　has its awards during the shows because everyone is in 
　　town.Runway will be receiving an award for fashion coverage. 
　　It is not such a, how do you say, big deal, almost like a 
　　formality.”

　　“Great, well at least I know what it’s for. What exactly am I 
　　supposed to write? Why don’t you just dictate in English and I 
　　can get Monsieur Renaud to translate it, OK? You start. I’m 
　　ready.” My voice had regained some confidence, but I could 
　　still barely grip the pen. The combination of exhaustion, 
　　stress, and hunger was making it hard to focus my eyes on the 
　　Ritz stationery that was laid out on my desk.

　　“Andrea, you are in luck again.”

　　“Oh, really? Because I’m not feeling so lucky right now, 
　　Briget.”

　　“These things are always conducted in English. There is no 
　　need for translation. So you can write it, yes?”

　　“Yes, yes I’ll write it,” I mumbled and dropped the phone. 
　　There wasn’t even time to consider that this was my very first 
　　chance to show Miranda that I was capable of doing something 
　　more sophisticated than fetching lattes.

　　After I hung up and began typing away at sixty words a minute― 
　　typing was the only useful class I’d taken in all of high 
　　school―I realized the whole thing would only take two, maybe 
　　three minutes for Miranda to read. There was just enough time 
　　to gulp some of the Pellegrino and devour a few of the 
　　strawberries someone had thoughtfully left on my small bar.If 
　　only they could’ve left a cheeseburger, I thought. I 
　　remembered that I had tucked a Twix bar in my luggage that had 
　　been neatly piled in the corner, but there wasn’t time to look 
　　for it. Exactly forty minutes had passed since I’d received my 
　　marching orders. It was time to see if I’d passed.

　　A different―but equally as terrified―maid answered Miranda’s 
　　door and ushered me into the living room. Obviously, I 
　　should’ve remained standing, but the leather pants I’d been 
　　wearing since the day before felt like they were permanently 
　　stuck to my legs, and the strappy sandals that hadn’t bothered 
　　me so much on the plane were beginning to feel like long, 
　　flexible razor blades affixed to my heels and toes. I chose to 
　　perch on the overstuffed couch, but the moment my knees bent 
　　and my butt made contact with the cushion, her bedroom door 
　　flew open and I instinctively launched to my feet.

　　“Where’s my speech?” she asked automatically, while yet 
　　another maid followed after her holding a single earring that 
　　Miranda had forgotten to put in. “You did write something, did 
　　you not?” She was wearing one of her classic Chanel 
　　suits―round collars with fur trim―and a looping strand of 
　　extraordinarily large pearls.

　　“Of course, Miranda,” I said proudly. “I think this will be 
　　appropriate.” I walked toward her since she was making no 
　　effort to retrieve it herself, but before I could offer her 
　　the paper she snatched it from my hand. I didn’t realize until 
　　her eyes had finished moving back and forth that I’d been 
　　holding my breath.

　　“Fine. This is fine. Certainly nothing groundbreaking, but 
　　fine. Let’s go.” She picked up a matching quilted Chanel purse 
　　and placed the chain handle over her shoulder.

　　“Pardon?”

　　“I said, let’s go. This silly little ceremony starts in 
　　fifteen minutes, and with any luck we’ll be out of there in 
　　twenty. I truly loathe these things.”

　　There was no way to deny that I’d heard her say both “let’s” 
　　and “we”: I was definitely expected to go with her. I glanced 
　　down at my leather pants and fitted blazer and figured that if 
　　she had no problem with it―and I certainly would’ve heard if 
　　she had―then what did it really matter? There would probably 
　　be fleets of assistants roaming around, tending to their 
　　bosses, and surely no one would care what we were wearing.

　　The “salon” was exactly what Briget had said it would be―a 
　　typical hotel meeting room, complete with a couple dozen round 
　　luncheon tables and a slightly raised presentation stage with 
　　a podium. I stood along the back wall with a few other 
　　employees of various kinds and watched as the president of the 
　　council showed an incredibly unfunny, uninteresting, wholly 
　　uninspired movie clip on how fashion affects all of our lives. 
　　A few more people hogged the mike for the next half hour, and 
　　then, before a single award had been presented, an army of 
　　waiters began bringing out salads and filling wine glasses. I 
　　looked warily at Miranda, who appeared acutely bored and 
　　irritated, and tried to shrink smaller behind the potted tree 
　　I was currently leaning against to keep from falling asleep. I 
　　can’t be sure how long my eyes were closed, but just as I lost 
　　all control of my neck muscles and my head started to nod 
　　forward uncontrollably, I heard her voice.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah! I don’t have time for this nonsense,” she 
　　whispered loudly enough that a few Clackers from a nearby 
　　table glanced up. “I wasn’t told that I would be receiving an 
　　award, and I wasn’t prepared to do so. I’m leaving.” And she 
　　turned around and began striding toward the door.

　　I hobbled after her but thought better of grabbing her 
　　shoulder. “Miranda? Miranda?” She was clearly ignoring me. 
　　“Miranda? Whom would you like to accept the award on behalf 
　　ofRunway ?” I whispered as quietly as I could and still have 
　　her hear me.

　　She whipped around and stared me straight in the eyes. “Do you 
　　think I care? Go up there and accept it yourself.” And before 
　　I could say another word, she was gone.

　　Oh my god. This wasn’t happening. I would surely wake up in my 
　　own, unglamorous, negative-thread-count-sheeted bed in just a 
　　minute and discover that the entire day―hell, the entire 
　　year―had just been a particularly horrid dream. That woman 
　　didn’t really expect me―thejunior assistant―to go up there and 
　　accept an award forRunway ’s fashion coverage, did she? I 
　　looked around the room frantically to see if anyone else 
　　fromRunway was attending the lunch. No such luck. I slumped 
　　down in a seat and tried to figure out whether I should call 
　　Emily or Briget for advice, or whether I should just leave 
　　myself since Miranda apparently cared nothing about receiving 
　　this honor. My Cell Phone had just connected to Briget’s 
　　office (who I was hoping could make it over there in time to 
　　take the goddamn award herself) when I heard the words “. . . 
　　extend our deepest appreciation to AmericanRunway for its 
　　accurate, amusing, and always informative fashion coverage. 
　　Please welcome its world-famous editor in chief, a living 
　　fashion icon herself, Ms. Miranda Priestly!”

　　The room erupted into applause at precisely the same moment I 
　　felt my heart stop beating.

　　There was no time to think, to curse Briget for letting this 
　　all happen, to curse Miranda for leaving and taking the speech 
　　with her, to curse myself for ever accepting this hateful job 
　　in the first place. My legs moved forward on their 
　　own,left-right, left-right, and climbed the three steps to the 
　　podium with no incident whatsoever. Had I not been utterly 
　　shell-shocked, I might have noticed that the enthusiastic 
　　clapping had given way to an eerie silence as everyone tried 
　　to figure out who I was. But I didn’t. Instead, some greater 
　　force prompted me to smile, reach out to take the plaque from 
　　the severe-looking president’s hands, and place it shakingly 
　　on the podium in front of me. It wasn’t until I lifted my head 
　　and saw hundreds of eyes staring back―curious, probing, 
　　confused eyes, all of them―that I knew for sure I would cease 
　　breathing and die right there.

　　I imagine I stood like that for no longer than ten or fifteen 
　　seconds, but the silence was so overwhelming, so 
　　all-consuming, that I wondered if I had, in fact, died 
　　already. No one uttered a word. No silver scraped plates, no 
　　glasses clinked, no one even whispered to a neighbor about who 
　　was standing in for Miranda Priestly. They just watched me, 
　　moment after moment, until I was left with no choice but to 
　　speak. I didn’t remember a word of the speech that I had 
　　written an hour earlier, so I was on my own.

　　“Hello,” I began and heard my voice reverberate in my ears. I 
　　couldn’t tell if it was the microphone or the sound of blood 
　　pounding inside my head, but it didn’t matter. The only thing 
　　I could hear for sure was that it was shaking―uncontrollably. 
　　“My name is Andrea Sachs and I’m Mir―uh, I’m on staff atRunway 
　　. Unfortunately, Miranda, um, Ms. Priestly had to step out for 
　　a moment, but I would like to accept this award on her behalf. 
　　And, of course, on behalf of everyone atRunway . Thank you, 
　　um”―I couldn’t remember the name of the council or the 
　　president here―“all so much for this, uh, this wonderful 
　　honor. I know I speak for everyone when I say that we are all 
　　so honored.” Idiot! I was stuttering and um-ing and shaking, 
　　and I was even conscious enough at this point to notice that 
　　the crowd had begun to twitter. Without another word, I walked 
　　in as dignified a manner as I could manage from the podium and 
　　didn’t realize until I’d reached the back doors that I’d 
　　forgotten the plaque. A staffer followed me to the lobby, 
　　where I’d just collapsed in a fit of exhaustion and 
　　humiliation, and handed it to me. I waited until she left and 
　　asked one of the janitors to throw it out. He shrugged and 
　　tossed it in his bag.

　　That bitch!I thought, too angry and tired to conjure up any 
　　really creative names or methods of ending her life. My phone 
　　rang and, knowing it was her, I turned off the ringer and 
　　ordered a gin and tonic from one of the front desk people. 
　　“Please. Please just have someone send one out. Please.” The 
　　woman took one look at me and nodded. I sucked the entire 
　　thing down in just two long gulps and headed back upstairs to 
　　see what she wanted. It was only two in the afternoon of my 
　　first day in Paris, and I wanted to die. Only death was not an 
　　option.


　　17                                                             

　　“Miranda Priestly’s room,” I answered from my new Parisian 
　　office. My four glorious hours that were supposed to 
　　constitute a full night’s sleep had been rudely interrupted by 
　　a frantic call from one of Karl Lagerfeld’s assistants at sixA 
　　.M., which is precisely when I’d discovered that all of 
　　Miranda’s phone calls were being routed directly tomy room for 
　　answering. It appeared the entire city and surrounding area 
　　knew Miranda stayed here during the shows, and so my phone had 
　　been ringing incessantly since the moment I stepped inside. 
　　Never mind the two dozen messages that had already been left 
　　on the voice mail.

　　“Hi, it’s me. How’s Miranda doing? Is everything OK? Did 
　　anything go wrong yet? Where is she and why aren’t you with 
　　her?”

　　“Hey, Em! Thanks for caring. How are you feeling, by the way?”

　　“What? Oh, I’m fine. A little weak, but getting better. 
　　Whatever. How isshe ?”

　　“Yes, well, I’m fine, too, thanks for asking. Yes, it was a 
　　long flight to get here and I haven’t slept for more than 
　　twenty minutes at a time since the phone keeps ringing and I’m 
　　pretty sure it’s never going to stop, and, oh! I gave a 
　　completely impromptu speech―after writing an impromptu 
　　speech―to a group of people who wanted Miranda’s company but 
　　apparently weren’t interesting enough to warrant it. Looked 
　　like a giant fucking idiot, actually, and nearly gave myself a 
　　heart attack in the process, but hey, other than that, things 
　　are just great.”

　　“Andrea! Be serious! I’ve been really worried about 
　　everything. There wasn’t a lot of time to prepare for this, 
　　and you know that if anything goes wrong over there she’s 
　　going to blame me anyway.”

　　“Emily. Please don’t take this personally, but I can’t talk to 
　　you right now. I just can’t do it.”

　　“Why? Is something wrong? How did her meeting go yesterday? 
　　Did she get there on time? Do you have everything you need? 
　　Are you making sure to wear appropriate clothes? Remember, 
　　you’re representingRunway over there, so you always have to 
　　look the part.”

　　“Emily. I need to hang up now.”

　　“Andrea! I’m concerned. Tell me what you’ve been doing.”

　　“Well, let’s see. In all the free time I’ve had, I’ve gotten a 
　　half-dozen or so massages, two facials, and a few manicures. 
　　Miranda and I have really bonded over doing the whole spa 
　　thing together. It’s great fun. She’s really trying hard not 
　　to be too demanding, says she really wants me to enjoy Paris 
　　since it’s such a wonderful city and I’m lucky to be here. So 
　　basically we just hang out and have fun. Drink great wine. 
　　Shop. You know, the usual.”

　　“Andrea! This is really not funny, OK? Now tell me what the 
　　hell is going on.” With every degree more annoyed she sounded, 
　　my mood improved a notch.

　　“Emily, I’m not sure what to tell you. What do you want to 
　　hear? How it’s been so far? Let’s see, I’ve spent most of my 
　　time trying to figure out how best to sleep through a phone 
　　that won’t stop ringing while simultaneously shoving enough 
　　food down my throat between the hours of two and sixA .M. to 
　　sustain me for the remaining twenty hours. It’s like fucking 
　　Ramadan here, Em―no eating during daylight hours. Yeah, you 
　　should be really sorry you’re missing this one.”

　　The other line began blinking and I put Emily on hold. Every 
　　time it rang my mind went quickly, uncontrollably, to Alex, 
　　wondering if he just might call and say that everything was 
　　going to be just fine. I’d called twice on my international 
　　cell since I’d arrived and he’d answered both times, but like 
　　the expert prank caller I’d been in junior high, I’d hung up 
　　the moment I’d heard his voice. It’d been the longest we’d 
　　ever gone without talking and I wanted to hear what was going 
　　on, but I also couldn’t help feeling like life had gotten 
　　significantly simpler since we’d taken a break from the 
　　bickering and the guilt-mongering. Still, I held my breath 
　　until I heard Miranda’s voice screeching from across the 
　　wires.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, when is Lucia due to arrive?”

　　“Oh, hello, Miranda. Let me just check the itinerary I have 
　　for her. Here it is. Let’s see, it says here that she was 
　　flying in directly from the shoot in Stockholm today. She 
　　should be at the hotel.”

　　“Connect me.”

　　“Yes, Miranda, just a moment, please.”

　　I put her on hold and switched her back to Emily. “That’s her, 
　　hold on.”

　　“Miranda? I just found Lucia’s number. I’ll connect you now.”

　　“Wait, Ahn-dre-ah. I’ll be leaving the hotel in twenty minutes 
　　for the rest of the day. I’ll need some scarves before I 
　　return, and a new chef. He should have a minimum of ten years’ 
　　experience in mostly French restaurants and be available for 
　　family dinners four nights a week and dinner parties twice a 
　　month.Now connect me to Lucia.”

　　I knew I should’ve gotten hung up on the fact that Miranda 
　　wanted me to hire her a New York chef from Paris, but all I 
　　could focus on was that she was leaving the hotel―without me, 
　　and for the entire day. I clicked back to Emily and told her 
　　that Miranda needed a new chef.

　　“I’ll work on it, Andy,” she announced while coughing. “I’ll 
　　do some preliminary screening and then you can talk to a few 
　　of the finalists. Just find out if Miranda would like to wait 
　　until she gets Home to meet them or if she’d prefer if you 
　　arranged for a couple to fly there and meet with her now, OK?”

　　“You can’t be serious.”

　　“Well, of course I’m serious. Miranda hired Cara when she was 
　　in Marbella last year. Their last nanny had just quit and she 
　　had me fly three finalists to her so she could find someone 
　　right away. Just find out, OK?”

　　“Sure,” I muttered. “And thanks.”

　　Just talking about those massages had sounded so good, I 
　　decided to book one for myself. There wasn’t an appointment 
　　available until early evening, so I called room service in the 
　　meantime and ordered a full breakfast. When the butler 
　　delivered it to me, I’d already crawled back into one of the 
　　plush robes, donned a pair of the matching slippers, and 
　　prepared myself to feast on the omelet, croissants, Danishes, 
　　muffins, potatoes, cereal, and crepes that arrived smelling so 
　　good. After devouring all the food and two cups of tea, I 
　　waddled back to the bed I hadn’t really slept in the night 
　　before and fell asleep so quickly that I wondered if someone 
　　had slipped something in my orange juice.

　　The massage was the perfect way to top off what had been a 
　　blessedly relaxed day. Everyone else was doing my work for me, 
　　and Miranda had only called and woken me once―once!―to request 
　　that I make her a lunch reservation the following day.This 
　　isn’t so bad, I thought, as the woman’s strong hands kneaded 
　　my twisted neck muscles. Not a bad perk at all. But just as I 
　　started to drift off once again, the Cell Phone that I’d 
　　grudgingly brought along began its persistent ring.

　　“Hello?” I said brightly, as if I weren’t lying naked on a 
　　table covered in oil, half-asleep.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah. Move my hair and makeup earlier and tell the 
　　Ungaro people I can’t make it tonight. I’ll be attending a 
　　small cocktail party instead, and I expect you to come with 
　　me. Be ready to leave in an hour.”

　　“Um, sure, uh, sure,” I stammered, trying to process the fact 
　　that I was actually going somewhere with her. A flashback from 
　　yesterday―the last time I was told at the very last minute 
　　that I was to go somewhere with her―flooded my brain, and I 
　　felt as though I would hyperventilate. I thanked the woman and 
　　charged the massage to the room even though I’d made it 
　　through only the first ten minutes, and I ran upstairs to 
　　figure out how to best maneuver around this newest obstacle. 
　　This was getting old. Quickly.

　　It took just a few minutes to page Miranda’s hair and makeup 
　　people (who, incidentally, were different from my own―I was 
　　pieced together by an angry-looking woman whose look of 
　　despair on seeing me for the first time haunted me still, 
　　while Miranda had a pair of gay guys who looked like they 
　　stepped directly out of the pages ofMaxim ) and change her 
　　appointment.

　　“No problem,” Julien squealed in a thick French accent. “We 
　　will be there, how you say? Wearing bells! We clear our 
　　schedules this week just in the case that Madame Priestly need 
　　us at different times!”

　　I paged Briget yet again and asked her to deal with the Ungaro 
　　people. Time to hit the wardrobe. The sketchbook with all my 
　　different “looks” was displayed prominently on the bedside 
　　table, just waiting for a lost fashion victim like myself to 
　　turn to it for spiritual guidance. I flipped through the 
　　headings and subheadings and tried to make sense of it all.

　　Shows:

　　1. Daytime

　　2. Evening

　　Meals:

　　1. Breakfast meeting

　　2. Lunch

　　A. Casual (hotel or bistro)

　　B. Formal (The Espadon in the Ritz)

　　3. Dinner

　　A. Casual (bistro, room service)

　　B. Midrange (decent restaurant, casual dinner party)

　　C. Formal (Le Grand Vefour restaurant, formal dinner 
　　party)

　　Parties:

　　1. Casual (champagne breakfasts, afternoon teas)

　　2. Stylish (cocktail parties by nonmajor people, book parties, 
　　“meet for drinks”)

　　3. Dressy (cocktail parties by major people, anything at a 
　　museum or gallery, postshow parties hosted by design team)

　　Miscellaneous:

　　1. To and from the airport

　　2. Athletic events (lessons, tournaments, etc.)

　　3. Shopping excursions

　　4. Running errands

　　A. To couture salons

　　B. To upscale shops and boutiques

　　C. To the local food store and/or health and beauty aid

　　There didn’t appear to be any suggestions for what to wear 
　　when one was unable to establish the major-ness or 
　　non-major-ness of the hosts. Clearly, there was the 
　　opportunity to make a big mistake here: I could narrow the 
　　event down to “Parties,” which was a good first step, but at 
　　that point things got gray. Was this party going to be a 
　　simple number 2, where I’d just pull out something chic, or 
　　was it really a 3, in which case I’d better pay attention to 
　　choose something from the more elegant choices? There were no 
　　instructions for “gray area” or “uncertainty,” but someone had 
　　helpfully included a last-minute handwritten note toward the 
　　bottom of the table of contents:When in doubt (and you never 
　　should be), better to be underdressed in something fabulous 
　　than overdressed in something fabulous. Well, OK then, it 
　　looked like I now squarely fit into category, party; 
　　subcategory, stylish. I turned to the six looks that Lucia had 
　　sketched for that specific description and tried to figure out 
　　what might look less ridiculous once it was actually on.

　　After a particularly embarrassing run-in with a 
　　feather-covered tank top and patent-leather thigh-high (as in 
　　yes, over the knee) boots, I finally selected the outfit on 
　　page thirty-three, a flowy patchwork skirt by Roberto Cavalli 
　　with a baby-T and a pair of biker-chick black boots by D&G. 
　　Hot, sexy, stylish―but not too dressy―without actually making 
　　me look like an ostrich, an eighties throwback, or a hooker. 
　　What more could you ask for? Just as I was attempting to 
　　choose a workable bag, the hair and makeup woman showed up to 
　　begin her frowning and disapproving attempts at making me not 
　　look half as horrific as she clearly thought I did.

　　“Um, could you maybe lighten the stuff under my eyes just a 
　　little?” I asked carefully, desperately trying not disparage 
　　her handiwork. It probably would’ve been better to have a go 
　　at the makeup myself― especially since I had more supplies and 
　　instructions than the NASA scientists commissioned to build 
　　the space shuttle―but the Makeup Gestapo showed up like 
　　clockwork whether I liked it or not.

　　“No!” she barked, clearly not striving for the same 
　　sensitivity as myself. “It looks better this way.”

　　She finished painting on the thick black paint along my bottom 
　　lashes and vanished as quickly as she’d arrived; I grabbed my 
　　bag (alligator Gucci bowling bag) and headed to the lobby 
　　fifteen minutes before our estimated time of departure so I 
　　could double-check that the driver was ready. Just as I was 
　　debating with Renaud whether Miranda would prefer for us to 
　　each take separate cars so she wouldn’t have to speak to me or 
　　actually use the same one and risk catching something from 
　　sharing a backseat with her assistant, she appeared. She 
　　looked me up and down very slowly, her expression remaining 
　　completely passive and indifferent. I’d passed! This was the 
　　first time since I’d started working there that I hadn’t 
　　received a look of all-out disgust or, at the very least, a 
　　snarky comment, and all it had taken was a SWAT team of New 
　　York fashion editors, a collection of Parisian hair and makeup 
　　stylists, and a hefty selection of the world’s finest and most 
　　expensive clothing.

　　“Is the car here, Ahn-dre-ah?” She looked stunning in a short, 
　　shirred velvet cocktail dress.

　　“Yes, Ms. Priestly, right this way,” Monsieur Renaud 
　　interrupted smoothly, leading us past a group of what could 
　　only be other American fashion editors also there for the 
　　shows. A deferential hush fell over the super-hip-looking 
　　crowd ofüber -Clackers when we walked past, Miranda two steps 
　　in front me, looking thin and striking and very, very unhappy. 
　　I nearly had to run to keep up, even though she was six inches 
　　shorter than me, and I waited until she gave me a “Well? What 
　　the hell are you waiting for?” look before I ducked into the 
　　backseat of the limo after her.

　　Thankfully the driver appeared to know where he was going, 
　　because I’d been paranoid for the past hour that she would 
　　turn to me and ask me where the unknown cocktail party was 
　　being held. She did turn to me, but she said nothing, choosing 
　　instead to chat with B-DAD on her Cell Phone, repeating over 
　　and over that she expected him to arrive with plenty of time 
　　to change and have a drink before the big party on Saturday 
　　night. He was flying over in his company’s private jet, and 
　　they were currently debating whether or not to bring Caroline 
　　and Cassidy; since he wouldn’t be returning until Monday, she 
　　didn’t want the girls to have to miss a day of school. It 
　　wasn’t until we’d actually pulled up in front of a duplex 
　　apartment on Boulevard Saint Germain that I wondered what it 
　　was exactly that I was supposed to do all night. She’d always 
　　been rather good about not abusing Emily or me or any of her 
　　staff in public, which indicated―at least on some level―that 
　　she knew she was doing it in the first place. So if she 
　　couldn’t really order me to fetch her drinks or find her 
　　someone on the phone or have something dry-cleaned while we 
　　were standing there, what was I to do?

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, this party is being hosted by a couple with whom 
　　I was friendly when we lived in Paris. They requested that I 
　　bring along an assistant to entertain their son, who generally 
　　finds these events rather dull. I’m sure the two of you will 
　　get along well.” She waited until the driver opened her door, 
　　then she daintily stepped out in her perfect Jimmy Choo pumps. 
　　Before I could open my own door, she had climbed the three 
　　steps and was already handing her coat to the butler, who was 
　　clearly awaiting her arrival. I slumped back into the soft 
　　leather seat for just a minute, trying to process this new gem 
　　of information she’d so coolly relayed. The hair, the makeup, 
　　the rescheduling, the panicked consultation with the style 
　　book, the biker-chick boots, were all so I could spend the 
　　night babysitting some rich couple’s snot-nosed kid? And 
　　aFrench snot-nosed kid, no less.

　　I spent three full minutes reminding myself thatThe New Yorker 
　　was now only a couple months away, that my year of servitude 
　　was about to pay off, that I could surely make it through one 
　　more night of tedium to get my dream job. It didn’t help. All 
　　of a sudden, I desperately wanted to curl up on my parents’ 
　　couch and have my mom microwave me some tea while my dad set 
　　up the Scrabble board. Jill and even Kyle would be visiting, 
　　too, with baby Isaac, who would coo and smile when he saw me 
　　and Alex would call and tell me he loved me. No one would care 
　　that my sweatpants were stained or my toes were frightfully 
　　unpedicured or that I was eating a big, fat chocolate éclair. 
　　Not a single person would even know that there were fashion 
　　shows going on somewhere across the Atlantic, and they sure as 
　　hell wouldn’t be interested in hearing about them. But all of 
　　that seemed incredibly far away, a lifetime actually, and 
　　right now I had to contend with a coterie of people who lived 
　　and died on the runway. That, and what was sure to be a 
　　screaming, spoiled little boy speaking some French gibberish.

　　When I finally pulled my scantily-but-stylishly clad self from 
　　the limo, the butler was no longer expecting anyone. There was 
　　music coming from a live band and the smell of scented candles 
　　wafted outside from a window above the small garden. I took a 
　　deep breath and reached up to knock, but the door swung open. 
　　It’s safe to say that never, ever, in my young life had I been 
　　more surprised than I was that night: Christian was smiling 
　　back at me.

　　“Andy, darling, so glad you could make it,” he said, leaning 
　　in and kissing me full on the mouth―a bit intimate considering 
　　my mouth had been hanging wide open in disbelief.

　　“What are you doing here?”

　　He grinned and pushed that ever-present curl off his forehead. 
　　“Shouldn’t I be asking you the same thing? Because you seem to 
　　follow me everywhere I go, I’m going to have to assume you 
　　want to sleep with me.”

　　I blushed and, always the lady, snorted loudly. “Yeah, 
　　something like that. Actually, I’m not here as a guest, I’m 
　　just a very well dressed babysitter. Miranda asked me to come 
　　along and didn’t tell me until the last second that I’m 
　　supposed to be watching the hosts’ bratty son tonight. So, if 
　　you’ll excuse me, I better go make sure he has all the milk 
　　and crayons he’ll need.”

　　“Oh, he’s just fine, and I’m pretty sure the only thing he’ll 
　　be needing tonight is another kiss from his babysitter.” And 
　　he cupped my face in his hands and kissed me again. I opened 
　　my mouth to protest, to ask him what the hell was going on, 
　　but he took that as enthusiasm and slid his tongue into my 
　　mouth.

　　“Christian!” I was hissing quietly, wondering just how quickly 
　　Miranda would fire me if she caught me making out with some 
　　random guy at one of her own parties. “What the hell are you 
　　doing? Let go of me!” I squirmed away, but he just continued 
　　to grin that annoyingly adorable smile.

　　“Andy, since you seem to be a little slow on the uptake here, 
　　this ismy house.My parents are hosting this party, and I was 
　　clever enough to have them ask your boss to bring you along. 
　　Did she tell you I was ten years old, or did you just decide 
　　that for yourself?”

　　“You’re joking. Tell me you’re joking. Please?”

　　“Nope. Fun, right? Since I can’t seem to pin you down any 
　　other way, I thought this might work. My stepmother and 
　　Miranda used to be friendly when Miranda worked at 
　　FrenchRunway ―she’s a photographer and does shoots for them 
　　all the time―so I just had her tell Miranda that her lonely 
　　son wouldn’t mind a little company in the form of one 
　　attractive assistant. Worked like a charm. Come on, let’s get 
　　you a drink.” He put his hand on the small of my back and led 
　　me toward a massive oak bar in the living room, which 
　　currently had three uniformed bartenders administering 
　　martinis and glasses of Scotch and elegant flutes of 
　　champagne.

　　“So, let me just get this straight: I don’t have to babysit 
　　for anyone tonight? You don’t have a baby brother or anything 
　　like that, do you?” It was incomprehensible that I had driven 
　　to a party with Miranda Priestly and had no responsibilities 
　　for the entire night except to hang out with a Hot Smart 
　　Writer. Maybe they’d invited me because they were planning to 
　　make me dance or sing to entertain the guests, or perhaps they 
　　were really short one cocktail waitress and figured I was the 
　　easiest last-minute fill-in? Or maybe we were headed to the 
　　coat check, where I would relieve the girl who sat there now, 
　　looking bored and tired? My mind refused to wrap itself around 
　　Christian’s story.

　　“Well, I’m not saying you don’t have to babysit at all 
　　tonight, because I plan on needing lots and lots of attention. 
　　But I think it’ll be a better night than you’d anticipated. 
　　Wait right here.” He kissed me on the cheek and disappeared 
　　into the crowd of partygoers, mostly distinguished-looking men 
　　and sort of artsy, fashionable women in their forties and 
　　fifties, what appeared to be a mix of bankers and magazine 
　　people, with a few designers, photographers, and models thrown 
　　in for good measure. There was a small, elegant stone patio in 
　　the back of the townhouse, all lit by white candles, where a 
　　violinist played softly, and I peeked outside. Immediately I 
　　recognized Anna Wintour, looking absolutely ravishing in a 
　　cream-colored silk slip dress and beaded Manolo sandals. She 
　　was talking animatedly to a man I presumed to be her 
　　boyfriend, although her giant Chanel sunglasses prevented me 
　　from being able to tell if she was amused, indifferent, or 
　　sobbing. The press loved to compare the antics and attitudes 
　　of Anna and Miranda, but I found it impossible to believe that 
　　anyone could be quite as unbearable as my boss.

　　Behind her stood what I presumed to be a fewVogue editors, 
　　eyeing Anna warily and wearily like our own Clackers eye 
　　Miranda, and next to them was a screeching Donatella Versace. 
　　Her face was so caked with makeup, her clothes were so 
　　phenomenally tight, that she actually looked like a caricature 
　　of herself. Like the first time I visited Switzerland and 
　　couldn’t help thinking how much it resembled the mock-up town 
　　in EPCOT, Donatella actually looked more like the character 
　　onSaturday Night Live than herself.

　　I sipped my glass of champagne (and I thought I wouldn’t be 
　　having any!) and made small talk with an Italian guy―one of 
　　the first ugly ones I’d ever met―who spoke in florid prose 
　　about his innate appreciation for the female body, until 
　　Christian reappeared again.

　　“Hey, come with me for a minute,” he said, once again 
　　navigating me smoothly through the crowd. He was wearing his 
　　uniform: perfectly faded Diesels, a white T-shirt, a dark 
　　sport coat, and Gucci loafers, and he blended into the fashion 
　　crowd seamlessly.

　　“Where are we going?” I asked, keeping my eyes peeled for 
　　Miranda, who, no matter what Christian said, was still 
　　probably expecting me to be banished to the corner, faxing or 
　　updating the itinerary.

　　“First, we’re getting you another drink, and maybe another for 
　　me as well. Then, I’m going to teach you how to dance.”

　　“What makes you think I don’t know how to dance? It just so 
　　happens that I’m a gifted dancer.”

　　He handed me another glass of champagne that seemed to appear 
　　out of thin air and led me into his parents’ formal living 
　　room, which was done in gorgeous shades of deep maroon. A 
　　six-piece band was playing hip music, of course, and the 
　　couple dozen people under thirty-five had congregated here. As 
　　if on cue, the band started playing Marvin Gaye’s “Let’s Get 
　　It On” and Christian pulled me against him. He smelled of 
　　masculine, preppy cologne, something old-school like Polo 
　　Sport. His hips moved naturally to the music, no thinking 
　　involved, we just moved together all over the makeshift dance 
　　floor, and he sang quietly in my ear. The rest of the room 
　　became fuzzy―I was vaguely aware there were others dancing, 
　　too, and somewhere someone was making a toast to something, 
　　but at that moment the only thing with any definition was 
　　Christian. Somewhere in the deep recesses of my mind, there 
　　was a tiny but insistent reminder that this body against mine 
　　was not Alex’s, but it didn’t matter at all. Not now, not 
　　tonight.

　　It was after one when I actually remembered that I was there 
　　with Miranda; it had been hours since I’d last seen her, and I 
　　was certain she’d forgotten all about me and headed back to 
　　the hotel. But when I finally pulled myself away from the 
　　couch in his father’s study, I saw her happily chatting with 
　　Karl Lagerfeld and Gwyneth Paltrow, all of them apparently 
　　oblivious to the fact that they would all be waking up for the 
　　Christian Dior show in just a few hours. I was debating 
　　whether or not I should approach her when she spotted me.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah! Come over here,” she called, her voice sounding 
　　almost merry over the din of the party that had become 
　　noticeably more festive in the last few hours. Someone had 
　　dimmed the lights, and it was abundantly clear that the 
　　partyers who remained had been well taken care of by the 
　　smiling bartenders. The annoying way she pronounced my name 
　　didn’t even bother me in my warm and fuzzy champagne buzz. And 
　　even though I thought the evening couldn’t get any better, she 
　　was clearly calling me over to introduce me to her celebrity 
　　friends.

　　“Yes, Miranda?” I cooed in my most ingratiating, 
　　thank-you-for-bringing-me-to-this-fabulous-place tone. She 
　　didn’t even look in my general direction.

　　“Get me a Pellegrino and then make sure the driver’s out 
　　front. I’m ready to leave now.” The two women and one man 
　　standing next to her snickered, and I felt my face turn bright 
　　red.

　　“Of course. I’ll be right back.” I fetched the water, which 
　　she accepted without a thank-you, and made my way through the 
　　thinning crowd to the car. I considered finding Christian’s 
　　parents to thank them but thought better of it and headed 
　　straight toward the door, where he was leaning up against the 
　　frame with a smugly satisfied expression.

　　“So, little Andy, did I show you a good time tonight?” he 
　　slurred just a little bit, and it seemed nothing short of 
　　adorable at that moment.

　　“It was all right, I suppose.”

　　“Just all right? Sounds to me like you wish I would’ve taken 
　　you upstairs tonight, huh, Andy? All in good time, my friend, 
　　all in good time.”

　　I smacked him playfully on the forearm. “Don’t flatter 
　　yourself, Christian. Thank your parents for me.” And, for 
　　once, I leaned over first and kissed him on the cheek before 
　　he could do anything else. “G’night.”

　　“A tease!” he called, slurring just a little bit more. “You’re 
　　quite the little tease. Bet your boyfriend loves that about 
　　you, doesn’t he?” He was smiling now, and not cruelly. It was 
　　all part of the flirty game for him, but the reference to Alex 
　　sobered me for a minute. Just long enough to realize that I’d 
　　had a better time tonight than I could remember having had in 
　　many years. The drinking and the close dancing and his hands 
　　on my back as he pulled me against him had made me feel more 
　　alive than in all the months since I’d been working atRunway, 
　　months that had been filled with nothing but frustration and 
　　humiliation and a body-numbing exhaustion. Maybe this was why 
　　Lily did it, I thought. The guys, the partying, the sheer joy 
　　of realizing you’re young and breathing. I couldn’t wait to 
　　call and tell her all about it.

　　Miranda joined me in the backseat of the limo after another 
　　five minutes, and she even appeared to be somewhat happy. I 
　　wondered if she’d gotten drunk but ruled that out immediately: 
　　the most I’d ever seen her drink was a sip of this or that, 
　　and then only because a social situation demanded it. She 
　　preferred Perrier or Pellegrino to champagne and certainly a 
　　milkshake or a latte to a cosmo, so the chances she was 
　　actually drunk right now were slim.

　　After grilling me about the following day’s itinerary for the 
　　first five minutes (luckily I’d thought to tuck a copy in my 
　　bag), she turned and looked at me for the first time all 
　　evening.

　　“Emily―er, Ahn-dre-ah, how long have you been working for me?”

　　It came out of left field, and my mind couldn’t work fast 
　　enough to figure out the ulterior motive for this sudden 
　　question. It felt strange to be the object of any question of 
　　hers that wasn’t explicitly asking why I was such a fucking 
　　idiot for not finding, fetching, or faxing something fast 
　　enough. She’d never actually asked about my life before. 
　　Unless she remembered the details of our hiring interview―and 
　　it seemed unlikely, considering she’d stared at me with 
　　utterly blank eyes my very first day of work―then she had no 
　　idea where, if anywhere, I’d attended college, where, if 
　　anywhere, I lived in Manhattan, or what, if anything, I did in 
　　the city in the few precious hours a day I wasn’t racing 
　　around for her. And although this question most certainly did 
　　have a Miranda element to it, my intuition said that this 
　　might, just maybe, be a conversation about me.

　　“Next month it will be a year, Miranda.”

　　“And do you feel you’ve learned a few things that may help you 
　　in your future?” She peered at me, and I instantly suppressed 
　　the urge to start rattling off the myriad things I’d 
　　“learned”: how to find a single store or restaurant review in 
　　a whole city or out of a dozen newspapers with few to no clues 
　　about its genuine origin; how to pander to preteenage girls 
　　who’d already had more life experiences than both my parents 
　　combined; how to plead with, scream at, persuade, cry to, 
　　pressure, cajole, or charm anyone, from the immigrant food 
　　delivery guy to the editor in chief of a major publishing 
　　house to get exactly what I needed, when I needed it; and, of 
　　course, how to complete just about any challenge in under an 
　　hour because the phrase “I’m not sure how” or “that’s not 
　　possible” was simply not an option. It had been nothing if not 
　　a learning-rich year.

　　“Oh, of course,” I gushed. “I’ve learned more in one year 
　　working for you than I could’ve hoped to have learned in any 
　　other job. It’s been fascinating, really, seeing how a 
　　major―themajor―magazine runs, the production cycle, what all 
　　the different jobs are. And, of course, being able to observe 
　　the way you manage everything, all the decisions you make―it’s 
　　been an amazing year. I’m so thankful, Miranda!” So thankful 
　　that two of my molars had been aching for weeks, too, but I 
　　wasn’t ever able to get in to see a dentist during working 
　　hours, but whatever. My newfound, intimate knowledge of Jimmy 
　　Choo’s handicraft had been well worth the pain.

　　Could this possibly sound believable? I stole a glance, and 
　　she seemed to be buying it, nodding her head gravely. “Well, 
　　you know, Ahn-dre-ah, that if ah-fter a year my girls have 
　　performed well, I consider them ready for a promotion.”

　　My heart surged. Was it finally happening? Was this where she 
　　told me that she’d already gone ahead and secured a job for me 
　　atThe New Yorker ? Never mind that she had no idea I would 
　　kill to work there. Maybe she had just figured it out because 
　　she cares.

　　“I have my doubts about you, of course. Don’t think I haven’t 
　　noticed your lack of enthusiasm, or those sighs or faces you 
　　make when I ask you to do something that you quite obviously 
　　don’t feel like doing. I’m hoping that’s just a sign of your 
　　immaturity, since you do seem reasonably competent in other 
　　areas. What exactly are you interested in doing?”

　　Reasonably competent! She may as well have announced I was the 
　　most intelligent, sophisticated, gorgeous, and capable young 
　　woman she’d ever had the pleasure of meeting. Miranda Priestly 
　　had just told me I was reasonably competent!

　　“Well, actually, it’s not that I don’t love fashion, because 
　　of course I do. Who wouldn’t?” I rushed on to say, keeping a 
　　careful appraisal of her expression, which, as usual, remained 
　　mostly unchanged. “It’s just that I’ve always dreamt of 
　　becoming a writer, so I was hoping that might, uh, be an area 
　　I could explore.”

　　She folded her hands in her lap and glanced out the window. It 
　　was clear that this forty-five-second conversation was already 
　　beginning to bore her, so I had to move quickly. “Well, I 
　　certainly have no idea if you can write a word or not, but I’m 
　　not opposed to having you write a few short pieces for the 
　　magazine to find out. Perhaps a theater review or a small 
　　writeup for the Happenings section. As long as it doesn’t 
　　interfere with any of your responsibilities for me, and is 
　　done only during your own time, of course.”

　　“Of course, of course. That would be wonderful!” We were 
　　talking, really communicating, and we hadn’t so much as 
　　mentioned the words “breakfast” or “dry cleaning” yet. Things 
　　were going too well not to just go for it, and so I said, 
　　“It’s my dream to work atThe New Yorker one day.”

　　This seemed to catch her now drifting attention, and once 
　　again she peered at me. “Why ever would you want to do that? 
　　No glamour there, just nuts and bolts.” I couldn’t decide if 
　　the question was rhetorical, so I played it safe and kept my 
　　mouth shut.

　　My time was about twenty seconds from expiring, both because 
　　we were nearing the hotel and her fleeting interest in me was 
　　fading fast. She was scrolling through the incoming calls on 
　　her Cell Phone, but still managed to say in the most 
　　offhanded, casual way, “Hmm,The New Yorker . Condé Nast.” I 
　　was nodding wildly, encouragingly, but she wasn’t looking at 
　　me. “Of course I know a great many people there. We’ll see how 
　　the rest of the trip goes, and perhaps I’ll make a call over 
　　there when we return.”

　　The car pulled up to the entrance, and an exhausted-looking 
　　Monsieur Renaud eclipsed the bellman who was leaning forward 
　　to open Miranda’s door and opened it himself.

　　“Ladies! I hope you had a lovely evening,” he crooned, doing 
　　his best to smile through the exhaustion.

　　“We’ll be needing the car at nine tomorrow morning to go to 
　　the Christian Dior show. I have a breakfast meeting in the 
　　lobby at eight-thirty. See that I’m not disturbed before 
　　then,” she barked, all traces of her previous humanness 
　　evaporating like spilled water on a hot sidewalk. And before I 
　　could think how to end our conversation or, at the very least, 
　　kiss up a little more for having had it at all, she walked 
　　toward the elevators and vanished inside one. I shot a weary, 
　　understanding look to Monsieur Renaud and boarded an elevator 
　　myself.

　　The small, tastefully arranged chocolates on a silver tray on 
　　my bedside table only highlighted the perfection of the 
　　evening. In one random, unexpected night, I’d felt like a 
　　model, hung out with one of the hottest guys I’d seen in the 
　　flesh, and had been told by Miranda Priestly that I was 
　　reasonably competent. It felt like everything was finally 
　　coming together, that the past year of sacrifice was showing 
　　the first early signs of potentially paying off. I collapsed 
　　on top of the covers, still fully dressed, and gazed at the 
　　ceiling, still unable to believe that I’d told Miranda 
　　straight up that I wanted to work atThe New Yorker, and she 
　　hadn’t laughed. Or screamed. Or in any way, shape, or form 
　　freaked out. She hadn’t even scoffed and told me that I was 
　　ridiculous for not wanting to get promoted somewhere 
　　withinRunway . It was almost as though―and I might be 
　　projecting here, but I don’t think so―she had listened to me 
　　andunderstood . Understood andagreed . It was almost too much 
　　to comprehend.

　　I undressed slowly, making sure to savor every minute of 
　　tonight, going over and over in my mind the way Christian had 
　　led me from room to room and then all over the dance floor, 
　　the way he looked at me through those hooded lids with the 
　　persistent curl, the way Miranda had almost, imperceptibly, 
　　nodded when I’d said what I really wanted was to write. A 
　　truly glorious night, I had to say, one of the best in recent 
　　history. It was already three-thirty in the morning Paris 
　　time, making it nine-thirty New York time―a perfect time to 
　　catch Lily before she went out for the night. Although I 
　　should’ve just dialed with no regard for the insistent, 
　　blinking light that announced―surprise, surprise―that I had 
　　messages, I cheerfully pulled out a pad of the Ritz stationery 
　　and got ready to transcribe. There were bound to be long lists 
　　of irritating requests from irritating people, but nothing 
　　could take away my Cinderella-esque evening.

　　The first three were from Monsieur Renaud and his assistants, 
　　confirming various drivers and appointment for the next day, 
　　always remembering to wish me a good night as though I were 
　　actually a person instead of just a slave, which I 
　　appreciated. Between the third and the fourth message I found 
　　myself both wishing and not wishing that one of the messages 
　　to come was from Alex, and as a result, was both delighted and 
　　anxious when the fourth was from him.

　　“Hi, Andy, it’s me. Alex. Listen, I’m sorry to bother you over 
　　there, I’m sure you’re incredibly busy, but I need to talk to 
　　you, so please call me on my Cell Phone as soon as you get 
　　this. Doesn’t matter how late it is, just be sure to call, OK? 
　　Uh, OK. ’Bye.”

　　It was so strange that he hadn’t said he loved me or missed me 
　　or was waiting for me to get back, but I guess all those 
　　things fall squarely into the “inappropriate” category when 
　　people decide to “take a break.” I hit delete and decided, 
　　rather arbitrarily, that the lack of urgency in his voice 
　　meant I could wait until tomorrow―I just couldn’t handle a 
　　long “state of our relationship” conversation at three o’clock 
　　in the morning after as wonderful a night as I’d just had.

　　The last and final message was from my mom, and it, too, 
　　sounded strange and ambiguous.

　　“Hi, honey, it’s Mom. It’s about eight our time, not sure what 
　　that makes it for you. Listen, no emergency―everything’s 
　　fine―but it’d be great if you could call me back when you hear 
　　this. We’ll be up for a while, so anytime is fine, but tonight 
　　is definitely better than tomorrow. We both hope you’re having 
　　a wonderful time, and we’ll talk to you later. Love you!”

　　This was definitely strange. Both Alex and my mother had 
　　called me in Paris before I’d gotten a chance to call either 
　　of them, and both had requested that I call them back 
　　regardless of what time I got the message. Considering my 
　　parents defined a late night by whether or not they managed to 
　　stay awake for Letterman’s opening monologue, I knew something 
　　had to be up. But at the same time, no one sounded 
　　particularly panicked or even a little frantic. Perhaps I’d 
　　take a long bubble bath with some of the Ritz products 
　　provided and slowly work up the energy to call everyone back; 
　　the night had just been too good to wreck by talking to my 
　　mother about some petty concern or to Alex about “where we 
　　stand.”

　　The bath was just as hot and luxurious as you’d expect it to 
　　be in a junior suite adjacent to the Coco Chanel suite at the 
　　Ritz Paris, and I took a few extra minutes to apply some of 
　　the lightly scented moisturizer from the vanity to my entire 
　　body. Then, finally wrapped in the plushest terry-cloth robe 
　　I’d ever pulled around me, I sat down to dial. Without 
　　thinking, I dialed my mother first, which was probably a 
　　mistake: even her “hello” sounded seriously stressed out.

　　“Hey, it’s me. Is everything OK? I was going to call you guys 
　　tomorrow, it’s just that things have been so hectic. But, wait 
　　until I tell you about the night I just had!” I knew already 
　　that I’d be omitting any romantic references to Christian, 
　　since I hadn’t felt like explaining the entire Alex scenario 
　　to my parents, but I knew they’d both be thrilled to hear that 
　　Miranda seemed to respond well when I’d brought up the idea 
　　ofThe New Yorker .

　　“Honey, I don’t mean to interrupt you, but something’s 
　　happened. We got a call today from Lenox Hill Hospital, which 
　　is on Seventy-seventh Street, I think, and it seems that 
　　Lily’s been in an accident.”

　　And although it’s quite conceivably the most clichéd 
　　expression in the English language, my heart stopped for just 
　　a moment. “What? What are you talking about? What kind of an 
　　accident?”

　　She had already switched into worried-mom mode and was clearly 
　　trying to keep her voice steady and her words rational, 
　　following what was sure to have been my dad’s suggestion of 
　　passing along to me a feeling of calm and control. “A car 
　　accident, honey. A rather serious one, I’m afraid. Lily was 
　　driving―there was also a guy in the car, someone from school, 
　　I think they said―and she turned the wrong way down a one-way 
　　street. It seems she hit a taxicab head-on, going nearly forty 
　　miles an hour on a city street. The police officer I spoke 
　　with said it was a miracle she’s alive.”

　　“I don’t understand. When did it happen? Is she going to be 
　　OK?” I had started choke-crying at some point, because as calm 
　　as my mother was trying to remain, I could hear the severity 
　　of the situation in her carefully chosen words. “Mom, where is 
　　Lily now, and is she going to be OK?”

　　It wasn’t until this point that I noticed my mom was crying 
　　also, just quietly. “Andy, I’m putting Dad on. He spoke to the 
　　doctors most recently. I love you, honey.” The last part came 
　　out like a squeak.

　　“Hi, honey. How are you? Sorry we have to call with news like 
　　this.” My dad’s voice sounded deep and reassuring, and I had a 
　　fleeting feeling that everything was going to work out. He was 
　　going to tell me that she’d broken her leg, maybe a rib or 
　　two, and someone had called in a good plastic surgeon to 
　　stitch up a few scrapes on her face. But she was going to be 
　　just fine.

　　“Dad, will you please tell me what happened? Mom said Lily was 
　　driving and hit a cab going really fast? I don’t understand. 
　　None of this makes any sense. Lily doesn’t have a car, and she 
　　hates to drive. She’d never be cruising around Manhattan. How 
　　did you hear about this? Who called you? And what’s wrong with 
　　her?” Again, I’d worked myself up to nearly hysterical, but 
　　again his voice was commanding and soothing all in one.

　　“Take a deep breath―I’ll tell you everything I know. The 
　　accident happened yesterday, but we just found out about it 
　　today.”

　　“Yesterday! How could this have happened yesterday and no one 
　　called me? Yesterday?”

　　“Sweetie, they did call you. The doctor said that Lily had 
　　filled out the front information page in her daily planner and 
　　had listed you as her emergency contact, since her 
　　grandmother’s really not doing all that well. Anyway, I guess 
　　the hospital called you at Home and on your cell, but of 
　　course you weren’t checking either one. When no one called 
　　them back or showed up in twenty-four hours, they went through 
　　her planner and noticed that we have the same last name as 
　　you, and so the hospital called here to see if we knew how to 
　　reach you. Mom and I couldn’t remember where you were staying, 
　　so we called Alex for the name of the hotel.”

　　“Oh my god, it was a day ago. Has she been alone this whole 
　　time? Is she still in the hospital?” I couldn’t ask the 
　　questions fast enough, but I still felt like I wasn’t getting 
　　any answers. All I knew for sure was that Lily had decided on 
　　me as the primary person in her life, the emergency contact 
　　you always had to list but never, ever took seriously. And 
　　here she’d really needed me―didn’t have anyone else, in 
　　fact―and I’d been nowhere to be found. My choking had 
　　subsided, but the tears continued to pour down my cheeks in 
　　hot, angry streaks, and my throat felt as though it had been 
　　scraped raw with a pumice stone.

　　“Yes, she’s still in the hospital. I’m going to be very honest 
　　with you, Andy. We’re not sure if she’s going to be all 
　　right.”

　　“What? What are you saying? Will someone just tell me 
　　something concrete already?”

　　“Honey, I’ve spoken to her doctor a half-dozen times already, 
　　and I have complete confidence that she’s getting the best 
　　attention. But Lily’s in a coma, sweetie. Now, the doctor did 
　　reassure me that―”

　　“A coma? Lily is in a coma?” Nothing was making sense anymore; 
　　the words were refusing to take on meaning.

　　“Honey, try to calm down. I know this is shocking for you and 
　　I hate to do this over the phone. We considered not telling 
　　you until you got back, but since that’s still half a week 
　　away, we figured you had a right to know. But also know that 
　　Mom and I are doing everything we can to make sure that Lily 
　　gets the best help. She’s always been like a daughter to us, 
　　you know that, so she’s not going to be alone.”

　　“Oh my god, I have to come home. Dad, I have to come Home! She 
　　doesn’t have anybody but me, and I’m across the Atlantic. Oh, 
　　but that fucking party is the night after tomorrow and it’s 
　　the sole reason she brought me and she’ll definitely fire me 
　　if I’m not there. Think! I need to think!”

　　“Andy, it’s late there. I think the best thing you could do is 
　　get some sleep, take a little time to think things over. Of 
　　course I knew you’d want to come Home right away, because 
　　that’s the kind of person you are, but keep in mind that for 
　　right now Lily is not conscious. Her doctor assured me that 
　　the chances are excellent that she’ll come out of this in the 
　　next forty-eight to seventy-two hours, that her body is just 
　　using this as an extended and deeper sleep to help itself 
　　heal. But nothing is certain,” he added, softly.

　　“And if she does come out of it? I’m assuming she could have 
　　all sorts of brain damage and horrible paralysis and things 
　　like that? Oh my god, I can’t stand it.”

　　“They just don’t know yet. They said that she is responsive to 
　　stimuli in her feet and legs, which is a good indication that 
　　there’s no paralysis. But there’s a lot of swelling around her 
　　head, and it won’t be possible to know anything for sure until 
　　she comes out of this. We just need to wait.”

　　We spoke for a few minutes longer before I hung up abruptly 
　　and called Alex’s Cell Phone.

　　“Hi, it’s me. Have you seen her?” I asked without so much as a 
　　hello. I was now a mini-Miranda.

　　“Andy. Hi. So you know?”

　　“Yeah, I just got off the phone with my parents. Have you seen 
　　her?”

　　“Yes, I’m at the hospital now. They won’t let me in her room 
　　right now since it’s not visiting hours and I’m not family, 
　　but I wanted to be here just in case she wakes up.” He sounded 
　　very, very far away, completely lost in his own thoughts.

　　“What happened? My mom said something about how she was 
　　driving and hit a cab or something? None of it makes any sense 
　　to me.”

　　“Uch, it’s a nightmare,” he sighed, clearly unhappy that no 
　　one else had told me the story yet. “I’m not sure I know 
　　exactly, but I did talk to the guy she was with when it 
　　happened. You remember Benjamin, that guy she was seeing in 
　　college who she walked in on having a threesome with those 
　　girls?”

　　“Of course, he works in my building now. I see him sometimes. 
　　What the hell was she doing with him? Lily hates him―she’s 
　　never gotten over that.”

　　“I know, that’s what I thought, too, but it seems they’ve been 
　　hanging out lately and they were together last night. He says 
　　they had gotten tickets to see Phish at Nassau Coliseum and 
　　drove out there together. I guess Benjamin smoked too much and 
　　decided he shouldn’t drive his car Home, so Lily volunteered. 
　　They made it back to the city with no problems until Lily ran 
　　a red light and then turned the wrong way down Madison, 
　　straight into oncoming traffic. They hit a cab head-on, on the 
　　driver’s side, and, well, uh, you know.” He choked up at this 
　　point, and I knew things must be worse than anyone had let on.

　　I’d done nothing but ask questions the last half hour―to my 
　　mom, my dad, and now Alex―but I couldn’t bring myself to ask 
　　the most obvious one: Why had Lily run a red light and then 
　　tried to drive south on an avenue that only ran north? But I 
　　didn’t need to, because Alex, as always, knew exactly what I 
　　was thinking.

　　“Andy, her blood alcohol level was nearly twice the legal 
　　limit.” He stated this matter-of-factly, trying not to swallow 
　　the words so I wouldn’t ask him to repeat them.

　　“Oh my god.”

　　“If―when―she wakes up, she’s going to have even more to deal 
　　with than her health: she’s in a lot of trouble. Luckily, the 
　　cabbie was OK, just a few bumps and bruises, and Benjamin’s 
　　left leg is completely smashed up, but he’ll be fine, too. We 
　　just need to wait for Lily. When are you coming Home?”

　　“What?” I was still trying to process the fact that Lily had 
　　been “seeing” a guy I’d always thought she hated, that she’d 
　　ended up in a coma because she was so drunk when she was with 
　　him.

　　“I said, when are you coming home?” When I was silent for a 
　　moment, he continued. “You are coming Home, aren’t you? You’re 
　　not seriously considering staying there while your best friend 
　　on earth lies in a hospital bed, are you?”

　　“What are you suggesting, Alex? Are you suggesting that this 
　　is my fault because I didn’t see it coming? That she’s lying 
　　in that hospital bed because I’m in Paris right now? That if I 
　　had known she was hanging out with Benjamin again none of this 
　　would have happened? What? What exactly are you saying?” I 
　　shrieked, all of the confusing emotions of the night boiling 
　　over into a simple, urgent need to scream at someone else.

　　“No, I didn’t say any of that. You did. I just assumed that of 
　　course you’d be coming Home to be with her as soon as 
　　possible. I’m not passing judgment on you, Andy―you know that. 
　　I also know that it’s really late for you already and there’s 
　　nothing you can do in the next couple hours, so why don’t you 
　　call me when you know what flight you’re on. I’ll pick you up 
　　at the airport and we can come straight to the hospital.”

　　“Fine. Thanks for being there for her. I really appreciate it 
　　and I know Lily does, too. I’ll call you when I know what I’m 
　　doing.”

　　“OK, Andy. I miss you. And I know you’ll do the right thing.” 
　　The line went dead before I could pounce all over that one.

　　Do the right thing? Theright thing? What the hell did that 
　　mean? I hated that he had just assumed I would jump on a plane 
　　and race Home because he told me to. Hated his condescending, 
　　preachy tone of voice that immediately made me feel like one 
　　of his students who’d just been caught talking during class. 
　　Hated that he was the one who was with Lily now even though 
　　she was my friend, that he was the one acting as a liaison 
　　between my own parents and me, that he was once again sitting 
　　on his moral high horse and calling the shots. Gone were the 
　　old days, when I might have hung up comforted by his presence, 
　　knowing that we were in this together and would get through it 
　　together, instead of as warring factions. When had things 
　　become like this?

　　There was no energy left to point out the obvious to him, 
　　namely, that if I left early to come Home, I’d be fired 
　　immediately and my entire year of servitude would have been 
　　for nothing. I had managed to suppress that awful thought 
　　before it took full form in my mind: that my being there or 
　　not being there would mean absolutely nothing to Lily right 
　　now, since she was unconscious and unaware in a hospital bed. 
　　The options swirled around in my mind. Perhaps I would stay 
　　just long enough to help with the party and then try to 
　　explain to Miranda what happened and make a plea for my job. 
　　Or, if it appeared that Lily was awake and alert, someone 
　　could explain that I would be on my way as soon as possible, 
　　at that point probably just a couple more days. And while both 
　　of these explanations sounded somewhat reasonable in the dark 
　　hours of early morning after a long night of dancing and many 
　　glasses of bubbly and a phone call telling me my best friend 
　　was in a coma because of her own drunk driving, somewhere down 
　　deep I knew―I knew―that neither of them was.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, leave a message at Horace Mann that the girls 
　　will be missing school on Monday because they’ll be in Paris 
　　with me, and make sure you get a list of all the work they’ll 
　　need to make up. Also, push back my dinner tonight until 
　　eight-thirty, and if they’re not happy about that, then just 
　　cancel it. Have you located a copy of that book I asked you 
　　for yesterday? I need four copies―two in French, two in 
　　English―before I meet them at the restaurant. Oh, and I want a 
　　final copy of the edited menu for tomorrow’s party to reflect 
　　the changes I made. Make certain that there will be no sushi 
　　of any kind, do you hear me?”

　　“Yes, Miranda,” I said, scribbling as quickly as possible in 
　　the Smythson notebook the accessories department had 
　　thoughtfully included with my array of bags, shoes, belts, and 
　　jewelry. We were in the car on our way to the Dior show―my 
　　first―with Miranda spitting out rapid-fire instructions with 
　　no regard for the fact that I’d gotten less than two hours of 
　　sleep. The knock on my door came at 7:45A .M. from one of 
　　Monsieur Renaud’s junior concierges who was there personally 
　　to wake me up and see that I was dressed in time to attend the 
　　show with Miranda, who had herself decided she’d like my 
　　assistance just six minutes earlier. He had politely ignored 
　　my being quite obviously passed out on the still made bed and 
　　had even dimmed the lights, which had blazed all night. I had 
　　twenty-five minutes to shower, consult the fashion book, dress 
　　myself, and do my own makeup, since my woman was not scheduled 
　　to come this early.

　　I awoke with a minor champagne headache, but the real jolt of 
　　pain came when the previous night’s phone calls came flashing 
　　back. Lily! I needed to call Alex or my parents and see if 
　　anything had happened in the last couple hours―god, it seemed 
　　like a week ago―but now there was no time.

　　By the time the elevator had hit the first floor, I’d decided 
　　that I had to stay for one more day, just one lousy day to 
　　tend to this party, and then I’d be Home with Lily. Maybe I’d 
　　even take a short leave of absence once Emily returned, to 
　　spend some time with Lil, help her recuperate and deal with 
　　some of the inevitable fallout from the accident. My parents 
　　and Alex would hold down the fort until I got there―it’s not 
　　as though she’s all alone,I told myself. And this was my life. 
　　My career, my entire future, was on the line here, and I 
　　didn’t see how two days either way made all that much 
　　difference to someone who wasn’t yet conscious. But to me―and 
　　certainly to Miranda―it made all the difference in the world.

　　Somehow I’d made it to the backseat of the limo before Miranda 
　　did, and even though her eyes were currently fixating on my 
　　chiffon skirt, she hadn’t yet commented on any one part of the 
　　outfit. I had just tucked the Smythson book into my Bottega 
　　Venetta bag when my new, international Cell Phone rang. It had 
　　never rung in Miranda’s presence before, I realized, so I 
　　scrambled quickly to turn off the ringer, but she ordered me 
　　to answer it.

　　“Hello?” I kept one eye on Miranda, who was paging through the 
　　day’s itinerary and pretending not to listen.

　　“Andy, hi honey.” Dad. “Just wanted to give you a quick 
　　update.”

　　“OK.” I was trying to say the bare minimum, since it seemed 
　　incredibly strange to be talking on the phone in front of 
　　Miranda.

　　“The doctor just called and said that Lily is showing signs 
　　that indicate she may come out of it soon. Isn’t that great? I 
　　thought you’d want to know.”

　　“That’s great. Definitely great.”

　　“Have you decided if you’re coming Home or not?”

　　“Um, no, I haven’t decided. Miranda’s having a party tomorrow 
　　night and she definitely needs my help, so . . . Listen, Dad, 
　　I’m sorry, but now’s not a great time. Can I call you back?”

　　“Sure, call anytime.” He tried to sound neutral, but I could 
　　hear the disappointment in his voice.

　　“Great. Thanks for calling. ’Bye.”

　　“Who was that?” Miranda asked, still peering at her itinerary. 
　　It had just begun raining and her voice was nearly drowned out 
　　by the sound of water hitting the limo.

　　“Hmm? Oh, that was my father. From America.” Where the hell 
　　did I come up with this stuff? FromAmerica ?

　　“And what did he want you to do that conflicted with your 
　　working at the party tomorrow night?”

　　I considered a million potential lies in the course of two 
　　seconds, but there wasn’t enough time to work out the details 
　　of any of them. Especially when she had turned her full 
　　attention to me now. I was left with no choice but to tell the 
　　truth.

　　“Oh, it was nothing. A friend of mine was in an accident. 
　　She’s in the hospital. In a coma, actually. And he was just 
　　calling to tell me how she was doing and to see if I was 
　　coming Home.”

　　She considered this, nodding slowly, and then picked up the 
　　copy of theInternational Herald Tribune paper the driver had 
　　thoughtfully provided. “I see.” No “I’m sorry,” or “Is your 
　　friend OK?,” just an icy, vague statement and a look of 
　　extreme displeasure.

　　“But I’m not, I’m definitely not going Home. I understand how 
　　important it is that I’m at the party tomorrow, and I’ll be 
　　there. I’ve thought a lot about it, and I want you to know 
　　that I plan to honor the commitment I’ve made to you and to my 
　　job, so I’ll be staying.”

　　At first Miranda said nothing. But then she smiled slightly 
　　and said, “Ahn-dre-ah, I’m very pleased with your decision. It 
　　is absolutely the right thing to do, and I appreciate that you 
　　recognize that. Ahn-dre-ah, I have to say, I had my doubts 
　　about you from the start. Clearly, you know nothing about 
　　fashion and more than that, you don’t seem to care. And don’t 
　　think I’ve failed to notice all the rich and varied ways you 
　　convey to me your displeasure when I ask you to do something 
　　that you’d rather not. Your competency in the job has been 
　　adequate, but your attitude has been substandard at best.”

　　“Oh, Miranda, please let me―”

　　“I’m speaking! And I was going to say that I’ll be much more 
　　willing to help you get where you’d like to go now that you’ve 
　　demonstrated that you’re committed. You should be proud of 
　　yourself, Ahn-dre-ah.” Just when I thought I’d faint from the 
　　length and depth and content of the soliloquy―whether from joy 
　　or from pain, I wasn’t sure―she took it one step further. In a 
　　move that was so fundamentally out of character for this woman 
　　on every level, she placed her hand on top of the one I had 
　　resting on the seat between us and said, “You remind me of 
　　myself when I was your age.” And before I could conjure up a 
　　single appropriate syllable to utter, the driver screeched to 
　　a halt in front of the Carrousel du Louvre and leapt out to 
　　open the doors. I grabbed my bag and hers as well and wondered 
　　if this was the proudest or the most humiliating moment of my 
　　life.

　　My first Parisian fashion show was a blur. It was dark, that 
　　much I remember, and the music seemed much too loud for such 
　　understated elegance, but the only thing that stands out from 
　　that two-hour window into bizarreness was my own intense 
　　discomfort. The Chanel boots that Jocelyn had so lovingly 
　　selected to go with the outfit―a stretchy and therefore 
　　skintight cashmere sweater by Malo over a chiffon skirt―made 
　　my feet feel like confidential documents being fed through a 
　　shredder. My head ached from a combination of hangover and 
　　anxiety, causing my empty stomach to protest with threatening 
　　waves of nausea. I was standing in the very back of the room 
　　with assorted C-list reporters and others who didn’t rank high 
　　enough to warrant a seat, keeping one eye on Miranda and the 
　　other scoping out the least humiliating places to be sick if 
　　the need arose.You remind me of myself when I was your age. 
　　You remind me of myself when I was your age. You remind me of 
　　myself when I was your age . The words kept reverberating over 
　　and over, keeping tune to the steady and persistent pounding 
　　of my forehead.

　　Miranda managed not to address me for nearly an hour, but 
　　after that she was off and running. Even though I was standing 
　　in the same room she was, she called my Cell Phone to request 
　　a Pellegrino. From that moment on, the phone rang in ten- to 
　　twelve-minute increments, each request sending another shock 
　　of pain directly to my head.Brrring. “Get Mr. Tomlinson on his 
　　air phone on the jet.” (B-DAD didn’t answer on his air phone 
　　when I tried calling it sixteen times.)Brrring. “Remind all 
　　theRunway editors in Paris that just because they’re here does 
　　not mean they can neglect their responsibilities at Home―I 
　　want everything in by original deadline!” (The couple ofRunway 
　　editors I had gotten in touch with at their various hotels in 
　　Paris had simply laughed at me and hung up.)Brrring. “Get me a 
　　regular American turkey sandwich immediately―I’m tiring of all 
　　this ham.” (I walked more than two miles in painful boots and 
　　with an upset stomach, but there was no turkey to be found 
　　anywhere. I’m convinced she knew, since she’d never once 
　　before asked for a turkey sandwich while in America―even 
　　though, of course, they’re available on every street 
　　corner.)Brrring. “I expect dossiers prepared on the three best 
　　chefs you’ve found thus far to be waiting in my suite by the 
　　time we return from this show.” (Emily hacked and whined and 
　　bitched but promised that she’d fax over whatever information 
　　she had on the candidates so far and I could make them into 
　　“dossiers.”)Brrring! Brrring! Brrring! You remind me of myself 
　　when I was your age .

　　Too nauseated and crippled to watch the parade of anorexic 
　　models, I ducked outside for a quick cigarette. Naturally, the 
　　moment I flicked on my lighter, my Cell Phone shrilled again. 
　　“Ahn-dre-ah! Ahn-dre-ah! Where are you? Where the hell are you 
　　right now?”

　　I tossed out my still unlit cigarette and raced back inside, 
　　my stomach churning so violently that I knew I would be 
　　sick―it was just a matter of when and where.

　　“I’m right in the back of the room, Miranda,” I said, sliding 
　　through the door and pressing my back against the wall. “Right 
　　to the left of the door. Do you see me?”

　　I watched as she swiveled her head back and forth until her 
　　eyes finally rested on mine. I was about to hang up the phone, 
　　but she was still stage whispering into it. “Don’t move, do 
　　you hear me? Do not move! One would think that my assistant 
　　would understand she’s here to assist me, not to gallivant 
　　around outside when I need her. This is unacceptable, 
　　Ahn-dre-ah!” By the time she’d made it to the back of the room 
　　and positioned herself in front of me, a woman in a glimmering 
　　floor-length silver gown with an empire waist and slight flare 
　　was sashaying through the reverent crowds, and the music 
　　switched from some sort of bizarre Gregorian chants to all-out 
　　heavy metal. My head began pounding almost in tune to the 
　　change in music. Miranda didn’t stop hissing when she reached 
　　me, but she did, finally, flip her Cell Phone closed. I did 
　　the same.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, we have a very serious problem here.You have a 
　　very serious problem. I just received a call from Mr. 
　　Tomlinson. It seems Annabelle brought it to his attention that 
　　the twins’ passports expired last week.” She stared at me, but 
　　all I could do was concentrate on not throwing up.

　　“Oh, really?” was all I could manage, but that clearly wasn’t 
　　the right response. Her hand tightened around her bag and her 
　　eyes began to bulge with anger.

　　“Oh, really?”she mimicked in a hyena-like howl. People were 
　　beginning to stare at us. “Oh, really? That’s all you have to 
　　say? ‘Oh, really?’ ”

　　“No, uh, of course not, Miranda. I didn’t mean it like that. 
　　Is there something I can do to help?”

　　“Is there something I can do to help?”she mimicked again, this 
　　time in a whiny child’s voice. If she had been any other 
　　person on earth, I would have reached out and slapped her 
　　face. “You damn well better believe it, Ahn-dre-ah. Since 
　　you’re clearly unable to stay on top of these things in 
　　advance, you’ll need to figure out how to renew them in time 
　　for their flight tonight. I will not have my own daughters 
　　miss this party tomorrow night, do you understand me?”

　　Did I understand her? Hmm. A very good question indeed. I was 
　　thoroughly unable to understand how it was my fault that her 
　　ten-year-olds had expired passports when they, theoretically, 
　　had two parents, a stepfather, and a full-time nanny to 
　　oversee such things, but I also understood it didn’t matter. 
　　If she thought it was my fault, it was. I understood that she 
　　would never understand when I told her that those girls were 
　　not getting on that plane tonight. There was virtually nothing 
　　I couldn’t find, fix, or arrange, but securing federal 
　　documents while in a foreign country in less than three hours 
　　was not happening. Period. She had finally made her very first 
　　request of me in a full year that I could not 
　　accommodate―regardless of how much she barked or demanded or 
　　intimidated, it was not happening.You remind me of myself when 
　　I was your age .

　　Fuck her. Fuck Paris and fashion shows and marathon games of 
　　“I’m so fat.” Fuck all the people who believed that Miranda’s 
　　behavior was justified because she could pair a talented 
　　photographer with some expensive clothes and walk away with 
　　some pretty magazine pages. Fuck her for even thinking that I 
　　was anything like her. And most of all, fuck her for being 
　　right. What the hell was I standing here for, getting abused 
　　and belittled and humiliated by this joyless she-devil? So 
　　maybe, just maybe, I, too, could be sitting at this very same 
　　event thirty years from now, accompanied only by an assistant 
　　who loathes me, surrounded by armies of people who pretend 
　　they like me because they have to.

　　I yanked out my Cell Phone and punched in a number and watched 
　　as Miranda became increasingly more livid.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah!” she hissed, much too ladylike to ever make a 
　　scene. “What do you think you’re doing? I’m telling you that 
　　my daughters need passports immediately, and you decide it’s a 
　　good time to chat on your phone? Are you under the very 
　　mistaken impression that’s why I brought you to Paris?”

　　My mother picked up on the third ring, but I didn’t even say 
　　hello.

　　“Mom, I’m getting on the next flight I can. I’ll call you when 
　　I get to JFK. I’m coming Home.” I clicked the phone shut 
　　before she could respond and looked up to see Miranda, who 
　　appeared genuinely surprised. I felt a smile break through the 
　　headache and nausea when I realized that I’d rendered her 
　　momentarily speechless. Unfortunately, she recovered quickly. 
　　There’s a small chance I wouldn’t have gotten fired if I’d 
　　immediately pleaded and explained and lost the defiant 
　　attitude, but I couldn’t seem to muster one single, tiny shred 
　　of self-control.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah, you realize what you’re doing, do you not? You do 
　　know that if you simply leave here like this, I’m going to be 
　　forced―”

　　“Fuck you, Miranda.Fuck you .”

　　She gasped audibly while her hand flew to her mouth in shock, 
　　and I felt not a few Clackers turn to see what the commotion 
　　was. They’d begun pointing and whispering, themselves as 
　　shocked as Miranda that some nobody assistant had just said 
　　that―and none too quietly―to one of the great living fashion 
　　legends.

　　“Ahn-dre-ah!” She grabbed my upper arm with her clawlike hand, 
　　but I wrenched it out of her grip and plastered on an enormous 
　　smile. I also figured it’d be an appropriate time to stop 
　　whispering and let everyone in on our little secret.

　　“So sorry, Miranda,” I announced in a normal voice that for 
　　the first time since I’d landed in Paris wasn’t shaking 
　　uncontrollably, “but I don’t think I’ll be able to make it to 
　　the party tomorrow. You understand don’t you? I’m sure it’ll 
　　be lovely, so please do enjoy it. That’s all.” And before she 
　　could respond, I hitched my bag higher up on my shoulder, 
　　ignored the pain that was searing from heel to toe, and 
　　strutted outside to hail a cab. I couldn’t remember feeling 
　　better than that particular moment. I was going Home.


　　18                                                             

　　“Jill, stop shouting for your sister!” my mother screamed 
　　unhelpfully. “I think she’s still sleeping.” And then, a voice 
　　came even louder from the bottom of the stairs.

　　“Andy, are you still sleeping?” she screamed in the general 
　　direction of my room.

　　I pried open an eye and checked the clock. Quarter after eight 
　　in the morning. Dear god, what were these peoplethinking ?

　　It took a few times of rocking from side to side before I 
　　could muster enough strength to pull myself to sit, and when I 
　　finally did, my whole body pleaded for more sleep, just a 
　　little more sleep.

　　“Morning,” Lily smiled, her face coming within inches of my 
　　own when she turned to face me. “They sure do get up early 
　　around here.” Since Jill and Kyle and the baby were Home for 
　　Thanksgiving, Lily had been forced to vacate Jill’s old room 
　　and move onto the lower half of my childhood trundle bed, 
　　which was currently pulled out and nearly level with my own 
　　twin-size bed.

　　“What are you complaining about? You look psyched to be awake 
　　right now, and I’m not sure why.” She was propped up on one 
　　elbow, reading a newspaper and sipping a cup of Coffee she 
　　kept picking up and placing down on the floor next to the bed.

　　“I’ve been up forever listening to Isaac cry.”

　　“He’s been crying? Really?”

　　“I can’t believe you didn’t hear him. It’s been incessant 
　　since about six-thirty. Cute kid, Andy, but that whole 
　　early-morning thing has got to go.”

　　“Girls!” my mother screamed again. “Is anyone awake up there? 
　　Anyone? I don’t care if you’re still sleeping, just please 
　　tell me one way or the other so I know how many waffles to 
　　defrost!”

　　“Please tell her one way or the other? I’m going to kill her, 
　　Lil.” And then toward my still closed door: “We’re still 
　　sleeping, can’t you tell? Fast asleep, probably for hours 
　　more. We don’t hear the baby or you screaming, or anything 
　　else!” I shouted back, collapsing backward on the bed. Lily 
　　laughed.

　　“Relax,” she said in a very un-Lily-like way. “They’re just 
　　happy you’re Home, and I, for one, am happy to be here. 
　　Besides, it’s only a couple more months, and we’ve got each 
　　other. It’s really not so bad.”

　　“A couple more months? It’s only been one so far, and I’m 
　　ready to put a bullet in my head.” I yanked my nightshirt over 
　　my head―one of Alex’s old workout ones―and put on a 
　　sweatshirt. The same jeans I’d been wearing every day for the 
　　past few weeks lay rumpled in a ball near my closet; when I 
　　pulled them over my hips, I noticed that were feeling snugger. 
　　Now that I no longer had to resort to gulping down a bowl of 
　　soup or subsisting on cigarettes and Starbucks alone, my body 
　　had adjusted itself accordingly and gained back the ten pounds 
　　I’d lost while working atRunway . And it didn’t even make me 
　　cringe; Ibelieved it when Lily and my parents told me I looked 
　　healthy, not fat.

　　Lily slipped on a pair of sweatpants over the boxers she’d 
　　slept in and tied a bandana over her frizzed-out curls. With 
　　her hair pulled off her face, the angry red marks where her 
　　forehead had met shards of the windshield were more 
　　noticeable, but the stitches had already come out and the 
　　doctor promised that there’d be minimal, if any, scarring. 
　　“Come on,” she said, grabbing the crutches that were propped 
　　against the wall everywhere she went. “They’re all leaving 
　　today, so maybe we’ll get a decent night’s sleep tonight.”

　　“She’s not going to stop screaming until we go down there, is 
　　she?” I mumbled, holding her elbow to help her to her feet. 
　　The cast around her right ankle had been signed by my entire 
　　family, and Kyle had even drawn annoying little messages from 
　　Isaac all over it.

　　“Not a chance.”

　　My sister appeared in the doorway, cradling the baby, who 
　　currently had drool halfway down his chubby chin but was now 
　　giggling contentedly. “Look who I have,” she cooed in baby 
　　talk, bouncing the happy boy up and down in her arms. “Isaac, 
　　tell your auntie Andy not to be such a tremendous bitch, since 
　　we’re all leaving real, real soon. Can you do that for mommy, 
　　honey? Can you?”

　　Isaac sneezed a very cute baby sneeze in response, and Jill 
　　looked as though he’d just risen up from her arms a full-grown 
　　man and recited a few Shakespearean sonnets. “Did you see 
　　that, Andy? Did youhear that? Oh, my little guy is just the 
　　cutest thing ever!”

　　“Good morning,” I said, kissing her on the cheek. “You know I 
　　don’t want you to leave, right? And Isaac’s welcome to stay as 
　　long as he can figure out how to sleep between the hours of 
　　midnight and tenA .M. Hell, even Kyle can stick around if he 
　　promises not to talk. See? We’re easy here.”

　　Lily had managed to hobble down the stairs and greet my 
　　parents, who were both dressed for work and saying their 
　　good-byes to Kyle.

　　I made my bed and tucked Lily’s back underneath, making sure 
　　to fluff her pillow before sticking it in my closet for the 
　　day. She’d come out of the coma before I even got off the 
　　plane from Paris, and after Alex I was the first one to see 
　　her awake. They ran a million tests on every conceivable body 
　　part, but with the exception of some stitches on her face, 
　　neck, and chest, and the broken ankle, she was perfectly 
　　healthy. Looked like hell, of course―exactly what you’d expect 
　　for someone who’d danced with an oncoming vehicle―but she was 
　　moving around just fine and even seemed almost annoyingly 
　　upbeat for someone who’d just lived through what she did.

　　It was my dad’s idea that we sublet our apartment for November 
　　and December and move in with them. Although the idea had been 
　　less than appealing to me, my zero-sum salary left me with few 
　　arguments. And besides, Lily seemed to welcome the chance to 
　　get out of the city for a little while and leave behind all 
　　the questions and gossip that she’d have to face as soon as 
　　she saw anyone she knew again. We’d listed the place 
　　oncraigslist.org as a perfect “holiday rental” to enjoy all 
　　the sights of New York, and to both our shock and amazement, 
　　an older Swedish couple whose children were all living in the 
　　city paid our full asking price―six hundred dollars more per 
　　month than we ourselves paid. The three hundred bucks a month 
　　was more than enough for each of us to live on, especially 
　　considering my parents comped us food, laundry, and the use of 
　　a beat-up Camry. The Swedes were leaving the week after New 
　　Year’s, just in time for Lily to start her semester over again 
　　and for me to, well, do something.

　　Emily had been the one who officially fired me. Not that I’d 
　　had any lingering doubts as to my employment status after my 
　　little foul-mouthed temper tantrum, but I suppose Miranda had 
　　been livid enough to drive Home one last dig. The whole thing 
　　had taken only three or four minutes and had unfolded with the 
　　ruthlessRunway efficiency that I loved so much.

　　I’d just managed to hail a cab and pry the left boot from my 
　　pulsating foot when the phone rang. Of course my heart 
　　instinctively lurched forward, but when I remembered that I’d 
　　just told Miranda what she could do with herYou remind me of 
　　myself when I was your age, I realized it couldn’t be her. I 
　　did a quick tabulation of the minutes that had passed: one for 
　　Miranda to shut her gaping mouth and recover her cool for all 
　　the Clackers who were watching, another for her to locate her 
　　Cell Phone and call Emily at Home, a third to convey the 
　　sordid details of my unprecedented outburst, and a final one 
　　for Emily to reassure Miranda that she herself would “see to 
　　it that everything was taken care of.” Yes, although the 
　　caller ID simply said “unavailable” on international phone 
　　calls, there wasn’t a doubt in the world who was ringing.

　　“Hi, Em, how are you?” I practically sang while rubbing my 
　　bare foot and trying not to let it touch the filthy taxi 
　　floor.

　　She seemed to be caught off-guard by my downright chipper 
　　tone. “Andrea?”

　　“Hey, it’s me, I’m right here. What’s up? I’m kind of in a 
　　hurry, so . . .” I thought about asking her directly if she’d 
　　called to fire me but decided to give her a break for once. I 
　　braced myself for the verbal tirade she was sure to let loose 
　　on me―how could you let her down, me down,Runway down, the 
　　wide world of fashion, blah, blah, blah―but it never came.

　　“Oh yeah, of course. So, I just spoke to Miranda . . .” Her 
　　voice trailed off as though she was hoping I’d continue and 
　　explain that the whole thing had been a big mistake and not to 
　　worry because I’d managed to fix it in the last four minutes.

　　“And you heard what happened, I’m assuming?”

　　“Um, yeah! Andy, what’s going on?”

　　“I should probably be asking you that, right?”

　　There was silence.

　　“Listen, Em, I have a feeling that you called to fire me. It’s 
　　OK if you did; I know it’s not your decision. So, did she tell 
　　you to call and get rid of me?” Even though I felt lighter 
　　than I had in many months, I still found myself holding my 
　　breath, wondering if maybe, through some dumb stroke of luck 
　　or misfortune, Miranda had respected my telling her to fuck 
　　off instead of been appalled by it.

　　“Yes. She asked me to let you know that you have been 
　　terminated, effective immediately, and she would like you to 
　　be checked out of the Ritz before she returns from the show.” 
　　She said this softly and with a trace of regret. Perhaps it 
　　was for the many hours and days and weeks she was now facing 
　　of finding and training someone all over again, but there 
　　sounded like there might be something even more behind it.

　　“You’re going to miss me, aren’t you, Em? Go on, say it. It’s 
　　OK, I won’t tell anyone. As far as I’m concerned, this 
　　conversation never happened. You don’t want me to go, do you?”

　　Miracle of miracles, she laughed. “What did you say to her? 
　　She just kept repeating that you were crass and unlady-like. I 
　　couldn’t get anything more specific out of her than that.”

　　“Oh, that’s probably because I told her to fuck herself.”

　　“You did not!”

　　“You’re calling to fire me. I assure you, I did.”

　　“Oh my god.”

　　“Yeah, well, I’d be lying if I said it wasn’t the single most 
　　satisfying moment of my pathetic life. Of course, I have now 
　　been fired by the most powerful woman in publishing. Not only 
　　do I not have a way to pay off my nearly maxed-out MasterCard, 
　　but future jobs in magazines are looking rather dismal. Maybe 
　　I should try to work for one of her enemies? They’d be happy 
　　to hire me, right?”

　　“Sure. Send your résumé over to Anna Wintour―they’ve never 
　　liked each other very much.”

　　“Hmm. Something to think about. Listen, Em, no hard feelings, 
　　OK?” We both knew that we had absolutely, positively not a 
　　single thing in common but Miranda Priestly, but as long as we 
　　were getting on so famously, I figured I’d play along.

　　“Sure, of course,” she lied awkwardly, knowing full well that 
　　I was about to enter into the upper stratosphere of social 
　　pariah-dom. The chances of Emily admitting she had so much as 
　　known me from this day forward were nonexistent, but that was 
　　OK. Maybe in ten years when she was sitting front and center 
　　at the Michael Kors show and I was still shopping at Filene’s 
　　and dining at Benihana, we’d laugh about the whole thing. But 
　　probably not.

　　“Well, I’d love to chat, but I’m kind of screwed up right now, 
　　not sure what to do next. I’ve got to figure out a way to get 
　　Home as soon as possible. Do you think I can still use my 
　　return ticket? She can’t fire me and leave me stranded in a 
　　foreign country, can she?”

　　“Well of course she would be justified in doing so, Andrea,” 
　　she said. Ah-hah! One last zinger. It was comforting to know 
　　that things never really changed. “After all, it’s really you 
　　who are deserting your job―you forced her to fire you. But no, 
　　I don’t think she’s a vengeful kind of person. Just charge the 
　　change fee and I’ll figure out a way to put it through.”

　　“Thanks, Em. I appreciate it. And good luck to you, too. 
　　You’re going to make a fantastic fashion editor someday.”

　　“Really? You think so?” she asked eagerly, happily. Why my 
　　opinion as the biggest fashion loser ever to hit the scene was 
　　at all relevant, I didn’t know, but she sounded very, very 
　　pleased.

　　“Definitely. Not a doubt in my mind.”

　　Christian called the moment I hung up with Emily. He had, 
　　unsurprisingly, already heard what happened. Unbelievable. But 
　　the pleasure he took from hearing the sordid details, combined 
　　with all sorts of promises and invitations he offered up, made 
　　me feel sick again. I told him as calmly as possible that I 
　　had a lot to deal with right now, to please stop calling in 
　　the meantime, that I’d get in touch if and when I felt like 
　　it.

　　Since they miraculously didn’t yet know that I’d flunked out 
　　of my job, Monsieur Renaud and entourage fell all over 
　　themselves on hearing that an emergency at Home demanded I 
　　return immediately. It took only a half hour for a small army 
　　of hotel staff to book me on the next flight to New York, pack 
　　my bags, and tuck me into the backseat of a limo stocked with 
　　a full bar bound for Charles de Gaulle. The driver was chatty, 
　　but I didn’t really respond: I wanted to enjoy my last moments 
　　as the lowest-paid but most highly perked assistant in the 
　　free world. I poured myself one final flute of perfectly dry 
　　champagne and took a long, slow, luxurious sip. It had taken 
　　eleven months, forty-four weeks, and some 3,080 hours of work 
　　to figure out―once and for all―that morphing into Miranda 
　　Priestly’s mirror image was probably not such a good thing.

　　Instead of a uniformed driver with a sign waiting for me when 
　　I exited customs, I found my parents, looking immensely 
　　pleased to see me. We hugged, and after they got over the 
　　initial shock of what I was wearing (skintight, very faded D&G 
　　jeans with spike-heeled pumps and a completely sheer 
　　shirt―hey, it was listed in category, miscellaneous; 
　　subcategory, to and from airport, and it was by far the most 
　　plane-appropriate thing they’d packed for me), they gave me 
　　very good news: Lily was awake and alert. We went straight to 
　　the hospital, where Lily herself even managed to give me 
　　attitude about my outfit as soon as I walked in.

　　Of course, there was the legal problem for her to contend 
　　with; she had, after all, been speeding the wrong way down a 
　　one-way street in a drunken stupor. But since no one else was 
　　seriously hurt, the judge had shown tremendous leniency and, 
　　although she’d always have a DWI on her record, she’d been 
　　sentenced to only mandatory alcohol counseling and what seemed 
　　like three decades’ worth of community service. We hadn’t 
　　talked a lot about it―she still wasn’t cool with admitting out 
　　loud that she had a problem―but I’d driven her to her first 
　　group session in the East Village and she’d admitted that it 
　　wasn’t “too touchy-feely” when she came out. “Freakin’ 
　　annoying” was how she put it, but when I raised my eyebrows 
　　and gave her a specialty withering look―à la Emily―she 
　　conceded that there were some cute guys there, and it wouldn’t 
　　kill her to date someone sober for once. Fair enough. My 
　　parents had convinced her to come clean to the dean at 
　　Columbia, which sounded like a nightmare at the time but ended 
　　up being a good move. He not only agreed to let Lily withdraw 
　　without failing in the middle of the semester, but signed the 
　　approval for the bursar’s office saying that she could just 
　　reapply for her tuition next spring.

　　Lily’s life and our friendship seemed to be back on track. Not 
　　so with Alex. He’d been sitting by her side at the hospital 
　　when we arrived, and the minute I saw him I found myself 
　　wishing my parents hadn’t diplomatically decided to wait in 
　　the cafeteria. There was an awkward hello and a lot of fussing 
　　over Lily, but when he’d shrugged on his jacket a half hour 
　　later and waved good-bye, we hadn’t said a real word to each 
　　other. I called him when I got Home, but he let it go to voice 
　　mail. I called a few times more and hung up, stalker-style, 
　　and tried one last time before I went to bed. He answered but 
　　sounded wary.

　　“Hi!” I said, trying to sound adorable and well adjusted.

　　“Hey.” He clearly wasn’t into my adorableness.

　　“Listen, I know she’s your friend, too, and that you would’ve 
　　done that for anyone, but I can’t thank you enough for 
　　everything you did for Lily. Tracking me down, helping my 
　　parents, sitting with her for hours on end. Really.”

　　“No problem. It’s what anyone would do when someone they know 
　　is hurt. No big deal.” Implied in this, of course, was that 
　　anyone would do it except someone who happens to be 
　　phenomenally self-centered with whacked-out priorities, like 
　　yours truly.

　　“Alex, please, can we just talk like―”

　　“No. We really can’t talk about anything right now. I’ve been 
　　around for the last year waiting to talk to you―begging, 
　　sometimes―and you haven’t been all that interested. Somewhere 
　　in that year, I lost the Andy I fell in love with. I’m not 
　　sure how, I’m not exactly sure when it happened, but you are 
　　definitely not the same person you were before this job. My 
　　Andy would have never even entertained the idea of choosing a 
　　fashion show or a party or whatever over being there for a 
　　friend who really, really needed her. Like,really needed her. 
　　Now, I’m glad you decided to come Home―that you know it was 
　　the right thing to do―but now I need some time to figure out 
　　what’s going on with me, and with you, and with us. This isn’t 
　　new, Andy, not to me. It’s been happening for a long, long 
　　time―you’ve just been too busy to notice.”

　　“Alex, you haven’t given me a single second to sit down, face 
　　to face, and try to explain to you what’s been going on. Maybe 
　　you’re right, maybe I am a completely different person. But I 
　　don’t think so―and even if I’ve changed, I don’t think it’sall 
　　been for the worse. Have we really grown apart that much?”

　　Even more than Lily, he was my best friend, of that I was 
　　certain, but he hadn’t been my boyfriend for many, many 
　　months. I realized that he was right: it was time I told him 
　　so.

　　I took a deep breath and said what I knew was the right thing, 
　　even though it didn’t feel so great then. “You’re right.”

　　“I am? You agree?”

　　“Yes. I’ve been really selfish and unfair to you.”

　　“So what now?” he asked, sounding resigned but not 
　　heartbroken.

　　“I don’t know. What now? Do we just stop talking? Stop seeing 
　　each other? I have no idea how this is supposed to work. But I 
　　want you to be a part of my life, and I can’t imagine not 
　　being a part of yours.”

　　“Me neither. But I’m not sure we’re going to be able to do 
　　that for a long, long time. We weren’t friends before we 
　　started dating, and it seems impossible to imagine just being 
　　friends now. But who knows? Maybe once we’ve both had a lot of 
　　time to figure things out . . .”

　　I hung up the phone that first night back and cried, not just 
　　for Alex but for everything that had changed and shifted 
　　during the past year. I’d strolled into Elias-Clark a 
　　clueless, poorly dressed little girl, and I’d staggered out a 
　　slightly weathered, poorly dressed semigrown-up (albeit one 
　　who now realized just how poorly dressed she was). But in the 
　　interim, I’d experienced enough to fill a hundred 
　　just-out-of-college jobs. And even though my résumé now 
　　sported a scarlet “F,” even though my boyfriend had called it 
　　quits, even though I’d left with nothing more concrete than a 
　　suitcase (well, OK, four Louis Vuitton suitcases) full of 
　　fabulous designer clothes―maybe it had been worth it?

　　I turned off the ringer and pulled an old notebook from my 
　　bottom desk drawer and began to write.

　　My father had already escaped to his office and my mother was 
　　on her way to the garage when I made it downstairs.

　　“Morning, honey. Didn’t know you were awake! I’m running out. 
　　I have a student at nine. Jill’s flight is at noon, so you 
　　should probably leave sooner than later since there will be 
　　rush-hour traffic. I’ll have my cell on if anything goes 
　　wrong. Oh, will you and Lily be Home for dinner tonight?”

　　“I’m really not sure. I just woke up and haven’t yet had a cup 
　　of Coffee. Do you think I could decide on dinner in a little 
　　while?”

　　But she hadn’t even stuck around to listen to my snotty 
　　response―she was halfway out the door by the time I opened my 
　　mouth. Lily, Jill, Kyle, and the baby were sitting around the 
　　kitchen table in silence, reading different sections of 
　　theTimes . There was a plate of wet-looking, wholly 
　　unappetizing waffles in the middle, with a bottle of Aunt 
　　Jemima and a tub of butter straight from the fridge. The only 
　　thing anyone appeared to be touching was the Coffee, which my 
　　father had picked up on his morning run to Dunkin Donuts―a 
　　tradition stemming from his understandable unwillingness to 
　　ingest anything my mother had made herself. I forked a waffle 
　　onto a paper plate and went to cut it, but it immediately 
　　collapsed into a soggy pile of dough.

　　“This is inedible. Did Dad pick up any donuts today?”

　　“Yeah, he hid them in the closet outside his office,” Kyle 
　　drawled. “Didn’t want your mother to see. Bring back the box 
　　if you’re going?”

　　The phone rang on my way to seek out the hidden booty.

　　“Hello?” I answered in my best irritated voice. I’d finally 
　　stopped answering any ringing phone with “Miranda Priestly’s 
　　office.”

　　“Hello there. Is Andrea Sachs there, please?”

　　“Speaking. May I ask who’s calling?”

　　“Andrea, hi, this is Loretta Andriano fromSeventeen magazine.”

　　My heart lurched. I’d pitched a 2,000-word “fiction” piece 
　　about a teenage girl who gets so caught up on getting into 
　　college that she ignores her friends and family. It had taken 
　　me all of two hours to write the silly thing, but I thought 
　　I’d managed to strike just the right chords of funny and 
　　touching.

　　“Hi! How are you?”

　　“I’m fine, thank you. Listen, your story got passed along to 
　　me, and I have to tell you―I love it. Needs some revisions, of 
　　course, and the language needs some tweaking―our readers are 
　　mostly pre- and early teens―but I’d like to run it in the 
　　February issue.”

　　“You would?” I could hardly believe it. I’d sent the story to 
　　a dozen teen magazines and then wrote a slightly more mature 
　　version and sent that to nearly two dozen women’s magazines, 
　　but I hadn’t heard a word back from anyone.

　　“Absolutely. We pay one-fifty per word, and I’ll just need to 
　　have you fill out a few tax forms. You’ve freelanced stories 
　　before, right?”

　　“Actually, no, but I used to work atRunway .” I don’t know how 
　　I thought this would help―especially since the only thing I 
　　ever wrote there were forged memos meant to intimidate other 
　　people―but Loretta didn’t appear to notice the gaping hole in 
　　my logic.

　　“Oh, really? My first job out of college was as a fashion 
　　assistant atRunway . I learned more there that year than I did 
　　in the next five.”

　　“It was a real experience. I was lucky to have it.”

　　“What did you do there?”

　　“I was actually Miranda Priestly’s assistant.”

　　“Were you really? You poor girl, I had no idea. Wait a 
　　minute―were you the one who was just fired in Paris?”

　　I realized too late that I had made a big mistake. There’d 
　　been a sizable blurb inPage Six about the whole messy thing a 
　　few days after I got Home, probably from one of the Clackers 
　　who’d witnessed my terrible manners. Considering they quoted 
　　me exactly, I couldn’t figure out who else it could’ve been. 
　　How could I have forgotten that other people might have read 
　　that? I had a feeling that Loretta was going to be distinctly 
　　less pleased with my story than she was three minutes ago, but 
　　there was no escaping now.

　　“Um, yeah. It wasn’t as bad as it seemed, really it wasn’t. 
　　Things got totally blown out of proportion in thatPage Six 
　　article. Really.”

　　“Well, I hope not! Someone needed to tell that woman to go 
　　fuck herself, and if it was you, well, then, hats off! That 
　　woman made my life a living hell for the year I worked there, 
　　and I never even had to exchange a single word with her.

　　“Look, I’ve got to run to a press lunch right now, but why 
　　don’t we set up a meeting? You need to come in and fill out 
　　some of these papers, and I’d like to meet you anyway. Bring 
　　anything else you think might work for the magazine.”

　　“Great. Oh, that sounds great.” We agreed to meet next Friday 
　　at three, and I hung up still not believing what had happened. 
　　Kyle and Jill had left the baby with Lily while they went to 
　　dress and pack, and he had commenced a sort of 
　　crying-whimpering thing that sounded as though he was two 
　　seconds away from all-out hysteria. I scooped him out of his 
　　seat and held him over my shoulder, rubbing his back through 
　　his terry-cloth footie pajamas, and, remarkably, he shut up.

　　“You’ll never believe who that was,” I sang, dancing around 
　　the room with Isaac. “It was an editor atSeventeen 
　　magazine―I’m going to be published!”

　　“Shut up! They’re printing your life story?”

　　“It’s not my life story―it’s ‘Jennifer’s’ life story. And it’s 
　　only two thousand words, so it’s not the biggest thing ever, 
　　but it’s a start.”

　　“Sure, whatever you say. Young girl gets super caught up in 
　　achieving something and ends up screwing over all the people 
　　who matter in her life. Jennifer’s story. Uh-huh, whatever.” 
　　Lily was grinning and rolling her eyes at the same time.

　　“Whatever, details, details. The point is, they’re publishing 
　　it in the February issue and they’re paying me three thousand 
　　dollars for it. How crazy is that?”

　　“Congrats, Andy. Seriously, that’s amazing. And now you’ll 
　　have this as a clip, right?”

　　“Yep. Hey, it’s notThe New Yorker, but it’s an OK first step. 
　　If I can round up a few more of these, maybe in some different 
　　magazines, too, I might be getting somewhere. I have a meeting 
　　with the woman on Friday, and she told me to bring anything 
　　else I’ve been working on. And she didn’t even ask if I speak 
　　French. And she hates Miranda. I can work with this woman.”

　　I drove the Texas crew to the airport, picked up a good and 
　　greasy Burger King lunch for Lily and me to wash down our 
　　breakfast donuts with, and spent the rest of the day―and the 
　　next, and the next after that―working on some stuff to show 
　　the Miranda-loathing Loretta.


　　19

　　“Tall vanilla cappuccino, please,” I ordered from a barista I 
　　didn’t recognize at the Starbucks on 57th Street. It had been 
　　nearly five months since I’d been here last, trying to balance 
　　a whole tray of Coffees and snacks and get back to Miranda 
　　before she fired me for breathing. When I thought about it 
　　like that, I figured it was far better to have gotten fired 
　　for screaming “fuck you” than it was to get fired because I’d 
　　brought back two packets of Equal instead of two raw sugars. 
　　Same outcome, but a totally different ballgame.

　　Who knew Starbucks had such huge turnover? There wasn’t a 
　　single person behind the counter who looked remotely familiar, 
　　making all the time I’d spent there seem that much farther 
　　away. I smoothed my well-cut but nondesigner black pants and 
　　checked to make sure that the cuffed bottoms hadn’t collected 
　　any of the city’s muddy slush. I knew there was an entire 
　　magazine staff of fashionistas who would emphatically disagree 
　　with me, but I thought I looked pretty damn good for only my 
　　second interview. Not only did I now know that no one wears 
　　suits at magazines, but somewhere, somehow, a year’s worth of 
　　high fashion had―by simple osmosis, I think―crammed itself 
　　into my head.

　　The cappuccino was almost too hot, but it felt fantastic on 
　　that chilly, wet day. The darkened, late-afternoon sky seemed 
　　to be misting the city with a giant Snow-Cone. Normally, a day 
　　like this would’ve depressed me. It was, after all, one of the 
　　more depressing days in the year’s most depressing month 
　　(February), the kind when even the optimists would rather 
　　crawl under the covers and the pessimists didn’t stand a 
　　chance of getting through without a fistful of Zoloft. But the 
　　Starbucks was warmly lit and just the right state of crowded, 
　　and I curled up in one of their oversize green armchairs and 
　　tried not to think of who had rubbed his dirty hair there 
　　last.

　　In the past three months, Loretta had become my mentor, my 
　　champion, my savior. We’d hit it off in that first meeting and 
　　she’d been nothing but wonderful to me ever since. As soon as 
　　I’d walked into her spacious but cluttered office and saw that 
　　she was―gasp!―fat, I had a weird feeling that I’d love her. 
　　She sat me down and read every word of the stuff I’d been 
　　working on all week: tongue-in-cheek pieces on fashion shows, 
　　some snarky stuff on being a celebrity assistant, a hopefully 
　　sensitive story about what it takes―and doesn’t take―to bring 
　　down a three-year-long relationship with someone you love but 
　　can’t be with. It was storybook-like, nauseating, really, how 
　　well we’d instantly hit it off, how effortlessly we shared our 
　　nightmares aboutRunway (I was still having them: a recent one 
　　had included a particularly horrid segment in which my own 
　　parents were shot dead by Parisian fashion police for wearing 
　　shorts on the street and Miranda had somehow managed to 
　　legally adopt me), how quickly we realized that we were the 
　　same person, just seven years apart.

　　Since I’d just had the brilliant idea of dragging all myRunway 
　　clothes to one of those snooty resale shops on Madison Avenue, 
　　I was a wealthy woman―I could afford to write for peanuts; 
　　anything for a byline. I had waited and waited for Emily or 
　　Jocelyn to call to tell me they were sending a messenger to 
　　pick it all up, but they never did. So it was all mine. I 
　　packed up most of the clothes but set aside the Diane Von 
　　Furstenburg wrap-dress. While going through the contents of my 
　　desk drawers that Emily had emptied into boxes and mailed to 
　　me, I came across the letter from Anita Alvarez, the one in 
　　which she expressed her worship of all thingsRunway . I’d 
　　always meant to send her a fabulous dress, but I’d never found 
　　the time. I wrapped the bold-printed dress in tissue paper, 
　　tossed in a pair of Manolos, and forged a note from Miranda―a 
　　talent I was unhappy to discover I still possessed. This girl 
　　should know―just once―how it feels to own one beautiful thing. 
　　And, more importantly, to think there’s someone out there who 
　　actually cares.

　　Except for the dress, the tight and very sexy D&G jeans, and 
　　the utterly classic, quilted, chain-handle purse I’d given to 
　　my mom as a gift (“Oh, honey, this is beautiful. What’s this 
　　brand again?”), I sold every last filmy top, leather pant, 
　　spiked boot, and strappy sandal. The woman who worked the 
　　register called the woman who owned the store, and the two of 
　　them had decided it would be best if they just closed the shop 
　　down for a few hours to evaluate my merchandise. The Louis 
　　Vuitton luggage―two large suitcases, one medium-size 
　　accessories bag, and an oversize trunk―alone had netted me six 
　　grand, and when they were finally finished whispering and 
　　examining and giggling, I cruised out of there with a check 
　　for just over $38,000. Which, by my calculations, meant that I 
　　could pay rent and even feed myself for a year while I tried 
　　to get this writing gig together. And then Loretta strolled 
　　into my life and made it instantly better.

　　Loretta had already agreed to buy four pieces―one blurb, only 
　　slightly larger than a pull quote, two 500-word pieces, and 
　　the original 2,000-word story. But even more exciting was her 
　　bizarre obsession with helping me make contacts, her eagerness 
　　to get in touch with people at other magazines who might just 
　　be interested in some freelance stuff. Which is exactly what 
　　put me at that Starbucks on that overcast winter day―I was 
　　headed back to Elias-Clark. It had taken a lot of insisting on 
　　her part to convince me that Miranda wouldn’t hunt me down the 
　　minute I walked in the building and knock me out with a blow 
　　dart, but I was still nervous. Not paralyzed with fear like 
　　the old days when a mere Cell Phone ring was enough to cause 
　　my heart to flip-flop, but jittery enough at the 
　　thought―however remote the possibility―of catching a glimpse 
　　of her. Or Emily. Or anyone else, for that matter, except for 
　　James, who had kept in touch.

　　Somehow, someway, for somereason, Loretta had called her old 
　　college roommate who just so happened to edit the city section 
　　ofThe Buzz and told her that she’d discovered the next new 
　　“it” writer. That was supposed to be me. She’d arranged an 
　　interview for me today, and even forewarned the woman that I’d 
　　been summarily dismissed from Miranda’s employ, but the woman 
　　had just laughed and said something to the effect that if they 
　　refused to use anyone whom Miranda had fired at one point or 
　　another, they’d barely have any writers at all.

　　I finished my cappuccino and, newly energized, gathered my 
　　portfolio of different articles and headed―this time calmly, 
　　without either an incessantly ringing phone or an armload of 
　　Coffees―toward the Elias-Clark building. A moment or two of 
　　reconnaissance from the sidewalk indicated that noRunway 
　　Clackers were amid the crowds in the lobby, and I proceeded to 
　　heave my weight against the revolving door. Nothing had 
　　changed in the five months since I’d last been there: I could 
　　see Ahmed behind the register in the newsstand, and a huge, 
　　glossy poster advertised thatChic would be hosting a party at 
　　Lotus that weekend. Although I technically should’ve signed 
　　in, I instinctively walked directly toward the turnstiles. 
　　Immediately, I heard a familiar voice call out,“I can’t 
　　remember if I cried when I read about his widowed bride, but 
　　something touched me deep inside, the day, the music died. And 
　　we were singing . . .” “American Pie”!What a sweetie, I 
　　thought. This was the good-bye song that I’d never gotten to 
　　sing. I turned to see Eduardo, as large and sweaty as usual, 
　　grinning. But not at me. In front of the turnstile closest to 
　　him stood a toweringly skinny girl with jet black hair and 
　　green eyes, wearing a dynamite pair of tight, pinstripe pants 
　　and a navel-revealing tank top. She also happened to be 
　　balancing a small tray with three Starbucks Coffees, an 
　　overflowing bag of newspapers and magazines, three hangers 
　　with complete outfits dangling from each one, and a duffel 
　　monogrammed with the initials “MP.” Her Cell Phone began to 
　　ring just as I realized what was happening, and she looked so 
　　panicked I thought she might cry on the spot. But when her 
　　repeated banging against the turnstile failed to elicit entry, 
　　she sighed deeply and sang,“’Bye, ’bye, Miss American Pie, 
　　drove my Chevy to the levee, but the levee was dry, and good 
　　old boys were drinking whiskey and rye, singing this will be 
　　the day that I die, this will be the day that I die . . .” 
　　When I looked back to Eduardo, he smiled quickly in my 
　　direction and winked. And then, while the pretty brunette girl 
　　finished singing her verse, he buzzed me through like I was 
　　someone who mattered.

　　This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters, Businesses, 
　　organizations, places, events, and incidents either are the 
　　product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. 
　　Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events, or 
　　locales is entirely coincidental.

　　“Material Girl” by Peter Brown and Robert Rans &copy; 1984 Candy 
　　Castle music. All Rights administered by Warner-Tamerlane 
　　Publishing Corp. All Rights Reserved. Used by Permission. 
　　WARNER BROS. PUBLICATIONS U.S. INC., Miami, FL 33014

　　“Wannabe” Words and Music by Matt Rowebottom, Richard 
　　Stannard, Geri Halliwell, Emma Bunton, Melanie Brown, Melanie 
　　Chisholm, and Victoria Adams. &copy; 1996 EMI music PUBLISHING LTD. 
　　and UNIVERSAL-POLYGRAM

　　INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHING, INC. All Rights for EMI MUSIC 
　　PUBLISHING LTD. in the U.S. and Canada Controlled and 
　　Administered by EMI FULL KEEL music. All Rights Reserved. 
　　International Copyright Secured. Used by Permission.

　　“I Think We’re Alone Now” Words and music by Ritchie Cordell. 
　　&copy; 1967

　　(Renewed 1995) EMI LONGITUDE music. All Rights Reserved. 
　　International Copyright Secured. Used by Permission.

　　“American Pie” Words and music by Don McLean. &copy; Copyright 1971 
　　Songs of Universal, Inc. on behalf of itself and Benny Bird 
　　Co., Inc. All rights reserved. Used by permission. 

　　(END)

