모모EPISODE 1 46 Linden Street
모모Act1.
모모Richard: Excuse me.My name is Richard Stewart. I'm a photographer.May take a picture and your little boy?
모모Mrs.Vann: What's it for?
모모Richard: It's for a book.
모모Mrs.Vann: You're writing a book?
모모Richard: It's a book of pictures. I call it Family Album,U.S.A.
모모Mrs.Vann: Oh, that's a nice idea.Well,it's fine if you take our picture. I'm Martha Vann.
모모Richard: Thank you. I appreciate your help. I'm Richard.What's your name?
모모Gerald: Gerald.
모모Richard: How old are you,Gerald?
모모Gerald: Five.
모모Richard: And where do you live?
모모Mrs.Vann: We live in California.
모모Richard: Well, welcome to New York.OK, just a second. I'm almost ready here.
모모Alexadra: Can I help you?
모모Richard: Oh, please.Hold Gerald's hand, please.Great! Now point to the buildings.Terrific! Give Mommy a kiss, Gerald. Nice! Thank you, Gerald. And thank you,Mrs Vann.
모모Mrs.Vann: Oh, my pleasure.We'll be looking for your book.
모모Richard: Thank you. Good-bye. Bye, Gerald.Thanks again.
모모Alexandra: Oh, you're welcome.
모모Richard: Hey, let me take your picture!
모모Alexandra: Wonderful.Please.
모모Richard: Are you from New York?
모모Alexandra: No, I'm from Greece. I'm an exchange student.
모모Richard: When did you come here?
모모Alexandra: Three months ago.
모모Richard: Your English is very good.
모모Alexandra: Thanks. I studied English in school.
모모Richard: Would you like some coffee?
모모Alexandra: No, thank you. Tell me about your book.
모모Richard: Oh, it's not finished yet, but I have some of the pictures. Would you like to see them?
모모Alexandra: Yes, I'd like that.
모모Richard: Here they are. Family Album, U.S.A. It's an album of pictures of the United States:the cities, the special places, and the people. And these are pictures of people working:steelworkers, bankers, police, street vendors, ambulance drivers, doctors...Oh, this is my father. He's a doctor. This is my mother.
모모Alexandra: What's her name?
모모Richard: Ellen. My younger brother, Robbie. He goes to high school. This is my sister Susan. She works for a toy company.Here's my grandfather. He lives in Florida. And this is my wife Marilyn.
모모Alexandra: Oh, she's very pretty.
모모Richard: Thanks.And what about your family?
모모Alexandra: They're in Thessaloniki. That's a large city in northem Greece. But now I'm living in the Bronx.
모모Richard: With a Greek-American family?
모모Alexandra: No. Hispanic.
모모Richard: Oh no! It's thirty.Will you excuse me? I have to meet my wife.
모모Alexandra: It was nice meeting you.
모모Richard: It was a pleasure meeting you, too.Thanks for your help.And good luck! I've got to go. By the way. I'm Richard. What's your name?
모모Alexandra: Alexandra.
모모Richard: Bye-bye, Alexandra.Thanks.
모모Alexandra: Bye-bye. Richard! Richard! You left your bag.
모모Act2.
모모Alexandra: Excuse me, officer.Can you help me?
모모Policeman: Sure.
모모Alexandra: Can you tell me how to get to Linden Street, in Riverdale?
모모Policeman: "Richard Stewart, 46 Linden Street, Riverdale, New York." You should take the number 1 subway.
모모Alexandra: Is there a station near here?
모모Policeman: Yes. The station's that way. You should take the number 1 train to Van Cortlandt Park.
모모Alexandra: Number 1 train to Van Cortlandt park. Thank you.
모모Policeman: Anytime. Good luck. Remember, ther number 1 train. The uptown platform.
모모Alexandra: Thank you.
모모Policeman: You're welcome.
모모Customer: Is this pink too bright for me?
모모Marilyn: Mmm-hmm. It is a very bright pink. Try this. It's size eight.
모모Customer: But I wear size ten.
모모Marilyn: How about green? It's size ten.
모모Customer: Let me try it on.
모모Customer: I'm taking too much of your time.
모모Marilyn: It's six 0'clock. Where's my husband? I was expecting him here at five forty-five.
모모Customer. Don't worry. The we're going to be late for dinner.
모모Marilyn: I know. But we're going to be late for dinner.
모모Customer: I'll take this green sweater. I like the color on me, don't you?
모모Marilyn: I think it looks terrific on you.
모모Richard: I'm sorry I'm so late. I had a really bad day.
모모Marilyn: It's ten after six. We're late. Robbie's cooking tonight,and dinner's at six thirty.
모모Richard: I know. I know.I'm really sorry. I left my bag of film on the ferry. I went back for it , but the ferry was gone. I lost a whole day's work.
모모Marilyn: I'll call the Staten lsland Ferry lost-and-found office.
모모Richard: I didn't think of that. Thanks.
모모Marilyn: Hello, Yes. The number, please, of the Staten lsland Ferry lost-and-found office. Five five five...zero eight zero eight. Thank you.
모모Richard: I really appreciate it, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: Hello. Did anyone find a camera bag this afternoon, a small canvas bag, on the J.F.Kennedy Ferry?...No? Maybe someone will find it. The name is Stewart, Richard Stewart. And the telephone number is five five five...three oh nine oh. Thank you.Sorry, Richard. They don't have it.
모모Richard: Thanks,anyway. There was a girl on the ferry. Now maybe...
모모Marilyn: Tell me about it on the way home.
모모Act3.
모모Philip: And give her a teaspoon of the medicine after every meal.Don't worry. She'll be fine. You're welcome. Good-bye.
모모Ellen: How are you?
모모Philip: I'm tired and hungry.
모모Ellen: Well, Marilyn and Richard called. They'll be here soon, and then we'll eat.
모모Philip: All right. Is...is Susan coming?
모모Ellen: Well, she'll be here later. She has to work late tonight.
모모Philip: And what's Robbie cooking for dinner?
모모Ellen: It's a surprise.
모모Philip: I hope its pasta.
모모Philip: Robbie, the dinner was terrific.
모모Susan: Yes, it was delicious.
모모Marilyn: What's for dessert?
모모Robbie: Oh, I forgot dessert.
모모Philip: Robbie!
모모Ellen: Don't worry. We've got lots of ice cream.
모모Richard: Oh, I'd love some ice cream.
모모Ellen: Well, there's chocolate and coffee and a little vanilla.
모모Robbie: I'll have vanilla. Is that all right with everyone?
모모Philip: I'll have chocolate.
모모Marllyn: Me, too.
모모Richard: Uh, one scoop of coffee and one scoop of chocolate for me.
모모Ellen: Robbie, will you help me serve?
모모Richard: I keep thinking about that bag of film. Eight rolls. a whole day's work. And good stuff,too.
모모Ellen: I'll get it. Hello.
모모Alexandra: Hello. Does Richard Stewart live here?
모모Robbie: Yes,he's my brother. I'm Robbie...Robbie Stewart.
모모Alexandra: I'm Alexandra Pappas. How do you do? Your brother left his bag of film on the ferryboat. I found it.
모모Robbie: I'm really glad to see you. I mean...my brother'll be really glad to see you!
모모Ellen: Robbie! Who is it?
모모Robbie: It's Richard's film! I mean, Alexandra Pappas. Come in, please.
모모Richard: Alexandra!
모모Alexandra: Hello, Richard. I found your bag!
모모Richard: Oh, thank you! Thank you! Um...Alexandra, let me introduce you. This is my wife Marilyn.
모모Alexandra: Richard showed me your photo. How do you do ?
모모Marilyn: Oh yes. Richard told us all about you. It's nice to meet you.
모모Richard: And this is my mother, Ellen Stewart.
모모Alexandra: How do you do?
모모Richard: And my father, Dr.Philip Stewart.
모모Philip: Nice to meet you, Alexandra.
모모Richard: And몴ah몴you met Robbie
모모Alexanra: Yes. And you must be Susan.Hi.
모모Susan: Hi.Welcome.
모모Richard: I'm so glad you found the bag and took the time and trouble to return it.
모모Alexandra: Oh,it was no trouble. I just took the wrong train.
모모Ellen: Would you like something to eat?
모모Alexandra: Thank you, no.I'm late for dinner at my house. I really have to go.
모모Richard: Would you like to call home?
모모Alexandra: I'd appreciate that.
모모Ellen: Please,use the phone.
모모Alexandra: Thanks. Excuse me.
모모Richard: Alexandra's a high-school exchange student from Greece.
모모Robbie: Where does she live?
모모Richard: With a family in the Bronx.
모모Robbie: Oh, that's not too far from here!
모모Richard: Take it easy, Robbie.
모모Alexandra: Thank you. I can only stay a few minutes.
모모Ellen: Have some iced tea.
모모Alexandra: Thanks, Mrs. Stewart.
모모Robbie: Please sit down, Alexandra.
모모Philip: So, you're an exchange student. Where do you go to school?
모모Alexandra: At the Bronx High School of Science.
모모Philip: Oh, that's a very good school. What are your favorite subjects?
모모Alexandra: Biology and mathematics. Richard tells me you're a doctor.
모모Philip: Yes, a pediatrician.And what does your father do?
모모Alexandra: He's a lawyer, in Thessaloniki.
모모Robbie: Would you like some pasta? I made it myself. It might be a little cold.
모모Alexandra: Thanks, no. I do have to go. It was nice meeting you all.
모모Marilyn: Well, maybe you'll come for lunch some Sunday, so we can really thank you for bringing Richard's bag back.
모모Alexandra: Maybe.
모모Ellen: You're welcome anytime.
모모Philip: Good-bye.
모모Richard: Can I drive you home?
모모Alexandra: No,thanks. The train is just up the street. It won't take me long at all.
모모Richard: Well, you really saved the day for me, Alexandra.
모모Alexandra: Bye.
모모Richard: Bye-bye.
모모Ellen: Good night.
모모Philip: She's a smart young lady, and very nice.
모모Robbie: Very! Hey, she forgot her bag!
모모Ellen: I guess we'll be seeing Alexandra again, Right, Robbie?
모모EPISODE 2 The Blind Date
모모Act 1.
모모Harry: Excue me. Can you help me?
모모Vendor: Sure, what do you want?
모모Harry: Where is 83 Wooster Street?
모모Vendor: That's easy. Walk to the comer. Then make a left turn. Then walk two blocks to the traffic light.Make another left to Wooster.
모모Harry: Thank you. To the comer and then a left?
모모Vendor: Yeah. A left. Hot dog? Only seventy-five cents.
모모Harry: No. Thank you. I have a dinner date.
모모Harry: 555-9470...and it's busy....Try again. 555-9470...and it's still busy. Excuse me ,ma'am.I'm looking for 83 Wooster Street.
모모Woman: Yes. Wooster Street is two blocks, and 83 is to the right about two houses.
모모Harry: Thank you, thank you!
모모Woman: You're welcome.
모모Susan: Who is it?
모모Harry: Harry Bennett. Is this Susan?
모모Susan: Yes, it is. Come up. I'm on the top floor.
모모Harry: Nice to meet you, Susan. Sorry I'm late. The traffic. The parking. I was lost.
모모Susan: What pretty flowers! Thank you. Oh, please come in. Don't worry about being late. It's fine. Excuse the mess. I just moved here. Oh, I'd like you to meet my sister-in- law Marilyn. Marilyn Stewart, this is Harry Bennett.
모모Harry: Pleased to meet you.
모모Marilyn: Nice to meet you, Harry.
모모Harry: Are we too late for our dinner reservation?
모모Susan: No,the restaurant will hold our table. I know the owner very well. I eat there a lot.
모모Harry: Do you know the phone number of the restaurant? I'd like to call home and leave the number with the baby-sitter.
모모Susan: Sure. The number is... five five five... seventeen twenty.
모모Harry: May I use the Phone? Five five five...one seven two oh, Hello? Hi, Michelle. It's Daddy. Can I speak to Betty? I want to leave the phone number of the restaurant.... Hi, Betty. I'll be at five five five...seventeen twenty. OK. Thanks. See you later. Well, that's done. Shall we go ?
모모Susan: I'm ready. See you later, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: Have a nice evening.
모모Harry: Bye, Marilyn. Hope to see you again.
모모Marilyn: Me, too. Have fun!
모모Susan: Thanks.
모모Harry: After you.
모모Act 2.
모모Somsak: Ah! Miss Stewart! Welcome! How are you?
모모Susan: Five, Somsak.And you?
모모Somsak: Fine, thank you.
모모Sumsak: This is my friend Harry Bennett.
모모Harry: Pleased to meet you.
모모Somsak: Very nice to meet you. Any friend of Miss Stewart's is welcome at Somsak's. Follow me, please.
모모Harry: I like it here.
모모Susan: I do, too. I come here often.
모모Somsak: A special place for special people.
모모Susan: Thank you, Somsak.
모모Harry: Well! Nice restaurant.
모모Somsak: Would you like something to drink?
모모Susan: Yes, I'd like a glass of ginger ale with ice. Harry, what would you like?
모모Harry: Do you have a dry white wine?
모모Somsak: How about a Califomia chabis?
모모Harry: Chablis is fine.
모모Somsak: What would you like to eat?
모모Susan: I'd like the mee krob. Harry, would you like to see a menu?
모모Harry: No, it's OK. I"ll have the mee krob also. What is it?
모모Susan: Crispy fried noodles. I love them.
모모Somsak: May I bring you a salad?
모모Susan: Oh yes. What do you recommend today?
모모Somsak: I recommend rose-petal salad. Special for new friends.
모모Susan: Rose-petal salad?
모모Harry: Why not?
모모Somsak: I'll take care of everything.
모모Susan: I hope you're hungry.
모모Harry: What? Oh, yes. Starving.Well, I...
모모Susan: Well, I...
모모Harry: What do you do at Universe Toy Company?
모모Susan: I'm the vice-president of new toy development.
모모Harry: Terrific!
모모Susan: I know you're a CPA.
모모Harry: That's true. Harry Bennett, Certfied public accountant. I love numbers. I do some work for Smith and Dale, your company's accounting firm.
모모Susan: And so...
모모Harry: Here we are.
모모Susan: Yes.
모모Harry: I have a daughter.
모모Susan: I know. How old is she?
모모Harry: She's nine years old.
모모Susan: That's a nice age. What's her name?
모모Harry: Michelle.
모모Susan: Do you have a picture of her?
모모Susan: She's very pretty.
모모Harry: Thank you.
모모Somsak: Rose-petal salad. And there's a phone call for you, Mr.Bennett.
모모Harry: I'll get the rest of the dinner. Excuse me.
모모Harry: Please forgive me ,Susan, but...I have to leave. I feel terrible, but...
모모Susan: What's the matter?
모모Harry: My daughter isn't feeling well.
모모Susan: Oh no! Is it serious?
모모Harry: I don't know.The baby-sitter says she has a stomachache, and she's crying. I'll have to go home. Will you forgive me?
모모Susan: Of course. I'm so sorry for Michelle. And you didn't have a chance to eat.
모모Harry: Oh, it's OK. Let me take you home first.
모모Susan: No,no. Please, go ahead.
모모Harry: It's our first date.
모모Susan: We'll make another. Please don't worry.
모모Harry: I'll phone you.
모모Susan: I hope your daughter is all right. Good-bye.
모모Harry: Good-bye.
모모Act 3.
모모Marilyn: What happened?
모모Susan: The baby-sitter called. His daughter is sick.
모모Marilyn: What's wrong?
모모Susan: I think she has a stomachache. He's a good father.
모모Marilyn: So...what do you think of him?
모모Susan: He's very nice. But I think he was nervous tonight. It was his first date in two years.
모모Marilyn: Will you see him again?
모모Susan: I hope so.
모모Marilyn: This food is delicious.
모모Susan: He didn't get a thing to eat.
모모Marilyn: You ordered enough for three or four people, but I'm not complaining. The food delicious.
모모Susan: Who is that?
모모Marilyn: Do you think it's...
모모Susan: No. You won't believe it, Marilyn!
모모Marilyn: I believe it. Even without looking.
모모Harry: Hi!
모모Susan: How...?
모모Harry: Your downstairs neighbor let me in.
모모Susan: Did you go home?
모모Harry: I did, but everything is OK, so I decided to come back. To apologize for leaving so early, I brought you a little gift. It's a bonsai tree for your new apartment. Hi, Marilyn. I hope it's not too late.
모모Marilyn: Oh, not at all. We're still eating.
모모Susan: Please, come in. Join us. It's our meal form the restaurant.And how is your daughter?
모모Harry: Oh, she's fine. It was only a tummy ache.
모모Susan: It's good that you went back.
모모Harry: Yes, I think it's important for me to be there since her mother died.
모모Susan: I agree. Aren't you hungry?
모모Harry: As a matter of fact...I am hungry.
모모Marilyn: There's lots of food left.
모모Harry: Mmm,this is delicious!
모모Susan: Enjoy!
모모Marilyn: I'm going to excuse myself. I have a lot of work to do to get ready for tomorrow. Good night, Harry. It was nice meeting you.
모모Harry: Bye, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: Good night, Susan.
모모Susan: Good night, Marilyn.
모모Susan: She's going to a fashion show here in the city tomorrow.She is sleeping here so she won't have to travel from Riverdale in the morning.
모모Harry: You two must be close.
모모Susan: We are. The whole Stewart family is close.
모모Harry: I like that.
모모Harry: And then, tww years ago, my wife died.
모모Susan: You miss her.
모모Harry: I do...yes, but I have Michelle...and with time...
모모Susan: Is there anyone else in your life?
모모Harry: No, not yet. What about you?
모모Susan: Oh, I date occasionally, but my work keeps me busy.
모모Harry: Ooh, speaking of keeping busy-I have an early start tomorrow, and the baby-sitter has to get home. Where did the time go? It's midnight. Thank you, Susan.I had a nice evening.
모모Susan: Me, too, Harry. Harry?
모모Harry: Yes?
모모Susan: I'd like to meet your daughter someday.
모모Harry: Does that mean that I can see you again?
모모Susan: Of course.
모모Harry: Wonderful. I'll call you, and we'll go out to dinner.
모모Susan: Please do.
모모Harry: I promise I won't leave early.
모모Susan: It was for a good reason.
모모Harry: You know something?
모모Susan: What?
모모Harry: I think we're going to be good friends. Good night, Susan.
모모Susan: Good night, Harry. Have a safe trip home. Are you all right?
모모Harry: Sorry.
모모Susan: I never liked that umbrella stand. Good night, Harry.
모모EPISODE 3 Grandpa's Trunk
모모Act 1.
모모Ellen: Marilyn, you want coffee or tea?
모모Marilyn: Coffee, please.
모모Ellen: I am so excited! At this time tomorrow morning, Grandpa will be sitting in the kitchen with us.
모모Marilyn: When does he arrive?
모모Ellen: At six 0'clock this evening.
모모Marilyn: By plane?
모모Ellen: No, by train.
모모Marilyn: Are we picking him up at the station?
모모Ellen: Not Grandpa. He doesn't want anybody picking him up. He likes to be independent.
모모Marilyn: Huh.
모모Ellen: Oh, let's go upstairs and prepare Grandpa's room.
모모Marilyn: Great! Let's do it!
모모Richard: Good morning, Mom.
모모Robbie: Morning.
모모Ellen: Well, hi,fellas.
모모Richard: Hello.
모모Marilyn: Hi,honey.
모모Richard: Hi, honey.
모모Robbie: Morning, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: We're going upstairs to set up Grandpa's room. There's coffee ready.
모모Robbie: I'm really excited about seeing Granpa.
모모Richard: Me, too. Milk, please.
모모Robbie: He's so funny. He always makes me laugh. I hope Grandpa's going to like living with us.
모모Richard: I think he will. It just takes time to fell comfortable in a new place.
모모Robbie: Won't he miss being in Florida?
모모Richard: Will, he will. But I think he'll like being here with the family.
모모Robbie: Are you sure about that? It's crazy here most of the time.
모모Richard: But it's fun.
모모Robbie: That's for sure.
모모Richard: You know, maybe I'll put together some photos of Grandpa as a "welcome" present.
모모Robbie: That's a neat idea. What can I do ? I've got it! I have a picture of Grandpa and Dad and me in my wallet. It's from the Fathers and Son's Breakfast at my junior high school graduation.
모모Richard: Oh, I remember this picture.
모모Robbie: I'd really lik to pick up Grandpa at the railroad station.
모모Richard: Railroad stations or airports-Grandpa always tells us he'll get here by himself.
모모Robbie: He's something!
모모Marilyn: Is this all Grandpa's stuff?
모모Ellen: That's it. But I'm sure he has a few bags with him on the train.
모모Marilyn: What's inside?
모모Ellen: I don't know. It's locked.
모모Philip: Hi.
모모Ellen: Oh, hi, darling.
모모Marilyn: Morning, Philip.
모모Philip: I want to put some of my good hangers in Grandpa's closet. You know I'm very exceted about his arrival.
모모Ellen: We are, too.Susan called early this morning. She's unhappy and can't leave till tonight. She wants to be here for Grandpa.
모모Philip: Well, Grandpa will be disappointed, too. He loves Susan.She always reminds him of Grandma. Well,how's everything here?
모모Marilyn: Fine.We were just wondering about this trunk.
모모Ellen: It's locked.
모모Philip: Oh. I have the key. Grandpa sent it to me.
모모Act 2.
모모Elsa: Excuse me .Is this seat taken?
모모Grandpa: No, it's not taken.
모모Elsa: Oh, thank you.
모모Grandpa: Oh, let me help you with this.
모모Elsa: Oh, thank you.
모모Grandpa: Do you want to sit by the window?
모모Elsa: No, no,no. I like the aisle seat better. Please, you sit by the window.
모모Grandpa: My name is Stewart...Malcolm Stewart.Pleased to meet you.
모모Elsa: I'm Elsa Tobin. How do you do?
모모Grandpa: Do you live in New York?
모모Elsa: No,no.I'm from Florida.
모모Grandpa: I am, too. But didn't you just get on?
모모Elsa: No,no.I just chaged my seat. A man next to me was smoking, and smoke really brothers me .Where are yuo from in Florida?
모모Grandpa: Titusville.It's near Orlando.
모모Elsa: Small world. I'm form Titusville,too.
모모Grandpa: Really? What part?
모모Elsa: My husband and I live near Spaceport.
모모Grandpa: I know that area. My house is only a few miles from Spaceport. Do you still live there?
모모Elsa: Oh yes, yes.My husband's there now. He couldn't take time off to come to New York with me. Do you still live there?
모모Grandpa: No.I sold the house and the furniture, put a few personal things in an old trunk, and shipped it to my children in NewYork. That's my desination.
모모Elsa: Are you married?
모모Grandpa: My wife died four years ago.She was a wonderful woman. A real friend.
모모Elsa: I'm sorry.Really, I'm sorry.
모모Grandpa: Lots of wonderful memories. We were married almost fifty years.Well, forty-seven, to be exact.
모모Elsa: John and I celebrate our fortieth anniversary next month.
모모Grandpa: Oh, congratulation! That's nice. What does John do?
모모Elsa: He's an aerospace engineer and works for Orlando Aircraft Corporation.He started with them almost forty years ago. What do you do?
모모Grandpa: I just retired. Had my own company. A construction company. Roads, bridges, big stuff. But I just sold it and retired.
모모Conductor: Excuse me, ma'am. Ticket,please.
모모Elsa: Would you kindly hold these keys, please? I have a ticket, I know. I was in the smoking section.
모모Conductor: It's OK, lady. Take your time.
모모Grandpa: I'm sure it's in your purse, Mrs.Tobin.
모모Elsa: Oh,here it is.
모모Grandpa: And here are your keys.
모모Elsa: Thank you.
모모Grandpa: Do you have family in New York?
모모Elsa: No, no.But do have very close friends in New York City. We like to go to the theater togther. You said you have family in New York.
모모Grandpa: Yes,indeed. A son and his wife and their three children-my grandchildren.
모모Elsa: You must be excited.
모모Grandpa: I can't wait, to see them!
모모Elsa: Are you going to live with them?
모모Grandpa: Yes.
모모Elsa: Permanently?
모모Grandpa: Well...they want me to, but it's too early to know for sure.I'm pretty independent. I tried to teach my kids the importance of independence, but I'm not sure I want to be alone. Some people don't mind being alone.I do.
모모Elsa: I understand. But tell me. Why did you stop working?
모모Grandpa: I retired because... I wanted to be with my family. I didn't want to be alone anymore!
모모Act 3.
모모Voice: Ladies and gentiemen, Amtrak is happy to announce our arrival in New York City. The train will be stopping in five Minutes. Please check to be sure you have your belonings. And have a good stay in the Big Apple. Thankyou.
모모Elsa: Well, here we are .It was so nice meeting you, Mr.Stewart.
모모Grandpa: And nice meeting you,too.Mrs.Tobin. Please look us up. We're in the phone book. Dr.Philip Stewart, in Riverdale.
모모Elsa: Your son?
모모Grandpa: That's right. And have a good time in New York.
모모Elsa: And don't be so independent. You're very lucky to have a caring family.
모모Robbie: When can we go fishing?
모모Grandpa: Robbie, we'll go fishing soon, and we'll take your dad with us.
모모Philip: I'm ready, Grandpa.You name the day.
모모Ellen: That's a great idea, Grandpa! Philip needs a day off.
모모Robbie Good idea.
모모Grandpa: Presents-for me?
모모Richard: Form me and Marilyn.
모모Robbie: And this one's form me .I looked all over the house to find it.
모모Grandpa: Richard, these are terrific pictures. This one really brings back memories. You remember that day, Robbie?
모모Robbie: I sure do. It was fun.
모모Grandpa: Oh, I'm sorry Susan isn't here. I miss her very much.
모모Ellen: She feels bad, too, Grandpa. She called to say the plane was delayed. You know airports.
모모Grandpa: I can't wait to see her. She looks just like Grandma at that age. I'd better unpack.I started traveling twenty-four hours ago. I'm not so young anymore.
모모Ellen: Don't you want something to eat?
모모Grandpa: No, thanks.After a good night's sleep, I'll enjoy breakfast even more.
모모Philip: Well, come on, Dad. Ellen and I'll take you to your room.
모모Robbie: I'm sure glad you're here, Grandpa.
모모Richard: Good night, Grandpa.
모모Marilyn: Pleasant dreams.
모모Grandpa: Philip, do you have the key to the trunk?
모모Philip: I have the key, but it doesn't work.
모모Grandpa: I sent the wrong key. I have something for you. I made it my self. I think you'll enjy it .I researched it for over a year.It's our family tree.
모모Ellen: Oh, Grandpa! How exciting!
모모Philip: Fabulous! Why, I didn't know that your grandfather was born in Germany.
모모Grandpa: Lots of interesting information about ur family.A gift from me.
모모Ellen: Thank you so much.
모모Susan: Grandpa! Grandpa! Oh, Grandpa, I'm so happy to see you!
모모Grandpa: Oh, you look so beautiful, Susan. My granddaughter. Like I always said, you look just like Grandma.
모모Philip: I think you're going to be very happy here with us.
모모Ellen: I know you will.
모모Grandpa:I don't feel alone anymore.
모모EPISODE 4 A Piece of Cake
모모Act 1.
모모Marilyn: I'm exhausted. My new exercise class is so hard.
모모Richard: Your new exercise class?
모모Marilyn: Yeah. My new advanced exercise class.
모모Richard: Why advanced?
모모Marilyn: My instructor thought that the beginner's class was too easy for me.
모모Richard: Too easy for you?
모모Marilyn: Don't laugh. In the beginner's class, they give you a chance to rest between exercises.
모모Richard: So?
모모Marilyn: The advanced class is nonstop.
모모Richard: I lift weights every morning for sixty minutes without stopping. No problem.
모모Marilyn: Listen, Richard, doing aerobics for an hour is a lot different than lifting weights.
모모Richard: Yeah.Quite a bit different.I think aerobics. I could work out in your class with no problem.
모모Marilyn: You think so?
모모Richard: Oh, without a duobt. When's the next class?
모모Marilyn: Tomorrow morning at ten 0'clock. Try it.
모모Richard: Tomorrow morning after lifting weights, I'll try aerobics. It's a snap. Tomorrow morning at ten 0'clock.
모모Marilyn: Aren't you going to the aetobics class this morning?
모모Richard: Of course. Easy. No sweat.
모모Marilyn: You are not going to be able to move afer this and the aerobics class.
모모Richard: Are you kidding me? It's going to be a piece of cake. You want to bet.
모모Marilyn: Yeah. What's the bet?
모모Richard: I bet I can go one hour in your class this morning and not feel a thing!
모모Marilyn: The bet is-I win, and you cook dinner for the entire family. Or you win, and I cook dinner for the entire family.
모모Richard: It's a bet.
모모Marilyn: OK. Call my instructor, Jcak Davis, right now. His number is 555-8842.The advanced class starts at ten 0'clock advanced class starts at ten o'clcok.
모모Richard: Well, it's eight twenty now.
모모Marilyn: It onl takes eight minutes by bicycle to the aerobics class. Give him a call.
모모Jack: Davis Aerobics Centrer for Good Health.
모모Richard: Jack Davis, please.
모모Jack: This is Jack Davis.
모모Richard: Hello. This is RIchard Stewart. My wife, Marilyn Stewart, is a member of your program. I'd like to come to the ten o'clock advanced class this morning.
모모Jack: Oh, fine,fine.Be here a few minutes early.You need to complete some forms before the class.
모모Richard: Thanks. I'm on my way over.
모모Jack: Good-bye.
모모Richard: Bye-bye. It's all set. I'm going.
모모Marilyn: Bye.
모모Richard: See you later.
모모Marilyn; Good luck.
모모Richard: Don't forget about the bet. Dinner for the entire family. And that includes Susan.
모모Marilyn: Don't you forget.
모모Act 2.
모모Jack: OK, Richard. That's terrific. Your pressure is 120 over 75, and that's fine. Now stand up,please. Good, it's 122 over 80. You can sit down now. When was your last complete physical?
모모Richard: Six months ago.
모모Jack: Good.Do you have any back or knee problems?
모모Richard: Nope. I am in perfect health.
모모Jack: What do you do for a living, Mr.Stewart?
모모Richard: I'm a photographer.
모모Jack: Interesting. What do you photograph?
모모Richard: Everything. The American scene. People, places, events.
모모Jack: Did you ever think of photographing an aerobics class?
모모Richard: No...I can't remember taking pictures of people exercising.
모모Jack: But don't you think it'd be a goo subject?
모모Richard: Sure.
모모Jack: I need some good photos for my advertising, Mr.Stewart Maybe you can photograph a class, and I can give you and Mrs.Stewart a month of classes-free.
모모Richard: When can I photograph a class?
모모Jack: Anytime.
모모Richard: How about today?
모모Jack: Terrific!
모모Jcak: Hi.
모모Instructor: Oh, hi.
모모Jack: Are we ready to go?
모모Instructor: Yeah. Yeah. Let's get in our lines. We're going to take it slow first. Stretch up...and we're going to go left first...2,3,4...now stretch...OK,hold to the right. Sunrises.Stretch it out. Flat back.Bring it up...and twists...and side...2,3...and left...push...push...turn...hit the floor. Take it side again...OK, and switch. Stretch it out .And we're going to warm down with a tango.Left, Right. Enjoy it.
모모Marilyn: Richard, did you go to the Davis Aerobics calss today?
모모Richard: Yes, I went to the aerobics class today.
모모Marilyn: What is wrong with you?
모모Richard: Nothing. I am in excellent health. I have ideal blood pressure. A perfect heart.In other words, I'm in wondeful condition.
모모Marilyn: Richard, did you go to the aerobics class, really?
모모Marilyn: And your legs don't hurt?
모모Richard: Hurt? What do you mean?
모모Marilyn: What about your arms? Lift your arms up like this. And they don't hurt-not even a little?
모모Richard: Nope.
모모Marilyn: You are in great condition. I can't believe it!
모모Act 3.
모모Marilyn: Grandpa, Ellen, Philip, Robbie, you and me .That's six steaks.
모모Richard: Don't forget Susan.
모모Marilyn: Seven steaks.Cooking dinner for the entire family is not so easy. The shopping:the salad:tomatoes,lettuce, cucumbers, and onions. The main course:steak and potatoes. Richard, how much broccoli do I need for seven people?
모모Richard: Marilyn, I have to tell you something. At today's exercise class...
모모Marilyn: Yes, Richard.
모모Richard: Well, I didn't really exercise.
모모Marilyn: I knew it!
모모Richard: I wanted to, but Jack Davis needed a photographer. I'm sorry, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: I don't understand. Did you exercise or not?
모모Richard: No.Instead of exercising, I photographed the class.
모모Marilyn: And you didn't exercise?
모모Richard: No.
모모Marilyn: There's another advanced class today at four 0'clock. We'll go together.
모모Richard: What about the bet?
모모Marilyn: Oh, the bet is still on, but you shop for the groceries.Remember, you win, and I cook dinner for the entire family.
모모Richard: You win, and I cook dinner for the entire family.
모모Marilyn: Including Susan. Four 0'clock at the advanced exercise class. With me.
모모Jack: Don't forget to breathe.
모모Instructor: Skip, hop, front, Twist...again...OK,Now...scissors.
모모Richard: This is fun.It's a piece of cake.
모모Marilyn: Yeah.Just wait.
모모Instuctor: 5, 6, 7, go right, 1, 2, back, 3, 1, 2, 3, pony, pony...1, 2, 3, kick...1, 2, 3, kick...pony.And twist, twist.
모모Jack: OK. Let's pick up the pace.
모모Marilyn: How are you doing, Richard?
모모Richard: I can barely move.
모모Instructor: 2,3,4,front.Now we're going to run it off. Front...knees up, knees up.
모모Jack: OK, Finish off by jogging in place. OK. Keep those knees up. All right.That's it for today. Thank you, everyone. See you next week.
모모Richard: Thank you, Jack, but no thank you.
모모Marilyn: The advanced exercise class is not so easy, huh?
모모Richard: Come on, Richard.Get up. Let's go, you have to cook dinner for the entire family.
모모Richard: Marilyn, I'm exhausted. I can't move.
모모Marilyn: Oh, you'll do it. It's a piece of cake.
모모Jack: Excuse me, Richard,Marilyn.
모모Richard: You are a terrific instructor, Jack.
모모Jack: Thanks. But I have a question. Is this your very first advanced aerobics class?
모모Richard: Yes,it is.
모모Jack: You are in great shape, Richard. Very few people last in this class for the full hour the very first time.
모모Marilyn: It's true. You are in Great shape.
모모Richard: Thanks!
모모Marilyn: I think we'll cook dinner together.
모모EPISODE 5 The Right Magic
모모Act1.
모모Robbie: Hi, Grandpa.
모모Grandpa: Hi, Robbie.
모모Robbie: Can I help?
모모Grandpa: Yes, indeed. Hand me two eggs from the refrigerator, and I'll make you two fried eggs.
모모Robbie: How about some bacon?
모모Grandpa: I made enough for an army. You going to the baseball game today? It's a perfect day for it-a little cloudy but nice and warm.
모모Robbie: Dad and I were planning to go to the game, but he has to work today, and my friends don't wan to go . It's not an important game, anyway.
모모Grandpa: Do you have any other plans for the day?
모모Robbie: I'll work on my computer. I have a new math program, and I want to learn how to use it.
모모Grandpa: Maybe you can teach me how to work on a computer someday.
모모Robbie: Anytime.It's really easy, but, like anything, you need to work at it, Grandpa.This bacon is great. I love crispy bacon.
모모Grandpa: Oh, what are you doing tomorrow?
모모Robbie: Nothing much.
모모Grandpa: Well,maybe your dad and I could take you fishing with us.
모모Robbie: I'd like that, but...
모모Grandpa: But what?
모모Robbie: But Dad is always so busy.
모모Grandpa: Well,can you come fishing with me tomorrow?
모모Robbie: Sure,I can.
모모Grandpa: Robbie says you can't take him to the game today.
모모Philip: I really feel bad about it, but they need me at the hospital today, in the children's ward.
모모Grandpa: I understand.
모모Philip: Maybe we can spend some time together next weekend.
모모Grandpa: Definitely.We should. You and Robbie and me. Remember our first fishing trip?
모모Philip: I sure do...Well, I've got to run, Dad. See you later.
모모Philip: Going fishing?
모모Grandpa: I'm thinking about it...So,how's work?
모모Philip: Oh,the usual problems.
모모Grandpa: You're working pretty hard these days.
모모Philip: I guess I am.
모모Grandpa: When did you last go fishing with Robbie?
모모Philip: I remember exactly. It was on his birthday, June second,two years ago. We didn't catch anything.
모모Grandpa: Remember our fishing trips?
모모Philip: Yes.I loved them.
모모Grandpa: Remember catching your first fish?
모모Philip: How can I forget? I fell out of the boat! we had some good times together.
모모Grandpa: Yes,we did. Maybe we should do it again.
모모Philip: How about tomorrow?
모모Grandpa: Don't you have to work?
모모Philip: My paper work will wait.
모모Grandpa: Oh, Robbie will be thrilled. I am, too, Son.
모모Philip: I want to spend more time with Robbie.
모모Grandpa: Tomorrow.It'll be like old times for you and me. And Robbie will love it.
모모Philip: Well, what's the weather going to be like?
모모Grandpa: Radio says sunny and mild.
모모Philip: Well, I'll tell Robbie. And thanks, Dad.
모모Grandpa: Don't thank me . I'm just being a grandfather.
모모Act 2.
모모Robbie: This is really neat! When do we eat?
모모Philip: First, we have to catch some fish. In order to catch fish, you have to do this. Here we go. that's it. Then drop it into the water. All of this comes before eating. OK?
모모Robbie: How do you know so much about fishing?
모모Philip: Grandpa taught me. We spent a lot of time fishing together. Now, the important thing is to get the book close to the fish. All right? Like this.
모모Robbie: I think I see some fish right under us, Dad.
모모Philip: Oh, not a chance!
모모Robbie: I just saw a big one!
모모Grandpa: Hi, there!
모모Albert: Hi.
모모Grandpa: What's your name?
모모Albert: Albert.
모모Grandpa: Are you all alone?
모모Albert: Yes,sir.
모모Grandpa: How old are you , Albert?
모모Albert: I'm ten.
모모Philip: Where's your father?
모모Albert: He's up there at the lodge.
모모Philip: Does he know you're here?
모모Albert: Yes, sir.
모모Philip: OK, Robbie, maybe you should watch him. The water's pretty deep here.
모모Robbie: I'll watch him, Dad.
모모Robbie: What time is it?
모모Grandpa: It's almost lunchtime, and no fish yet.
모모Rbbie: I can go up to the lodge for some hot dogs and drinks.
모모Philip: No way! We're here to catch our lunch.
모모Grandpa: To catch fish, you need the right magic.
모모Philip: That's right. I forgot! The right magic. Do it for Robbie,Dad.
모모Grandpa: You remember?
모모Philip: Sure. Come on.
모모Grandpa: Well,first, you have to turn your hat around like this. Then you close your eyes and say the magic words. Fish, fish, send me a fish.
모모Robbie: Fish, fish, send me a fish...I got one!
모모Grandpa: See, it works!
모모Robbie: It's a big one!
모모Philip: Well, it always worked for me, too.
모모Robbie: Grandpa, get the net ,please!
모모Robbie: Dad, you got one, too!
모모Philip: You bet I have!
모모Grandpa: Easy, Philip, easy.
모모Robbie: Sorry,Dad.
모모Philip: Well, one more and I've got a pair of boots.
모모Robbie: You didn't say the magic words.
모모Grandpa: Robbie's right.
모모Philip: Yes,but you did, and we've got our lunch. Let's build a fire and cook it ! Come on ,Albert, you can help us!
모모Albert: I want to stay here and fish.
모모Grandpa: All right, but be careful.
모모Robbie: Is it finished yet?
모모Philip: I think so. I hope you like,your fish well done.
모모Grandpa: Burned, you mean.
모모Philip: Hey, I'm a doctor, not a chef.
모모Albert: Help! Help! I can't swim.
모모Robbie: Dad! Grandpa! He fell in.
모모Philip: Easy does it ,Robbie.That a boy. That's it.
모모Grandpa: He's not breathing, Philip!
모모Philip: Robbie, run to the car.Bring a blanket and my medical bag.
모모Robbie: Yes,Dad.
모모Philip: Now, come on, son. Come on, son.
모모Grandpa: Breathe,Albert!
모모Act3.
모모Robbie: Here's the bag. Will he be OK, Dad?
모모Philip: I hope so. That's it. That's the way. That's it. There. Oh, it's going to be all right. That's it. Wrap him in the blanket. Dad! That's it. That's it. It's all right, Albert. You're going to be OK.
모모Albert: I want my daddy!
모모Philip: We'll take you to him. Easy now. Easy does it. That's it.
모모Grandpa: Your dad is quite a guy.
모모Robbie: I know, Grandpa.
모모Grandpa: How is he ,Philip?
모모Philip: He's asleep. He's ging to be fine.
모모Father: How can I thank all of you?
모모Philip: Thank my son Robbie. He pulled him out of the water.
모모Father: I'm very grateful, Robbie.
모모Robbie: Dad saved him, not me.
모모Father: I'm so thankful to all of you.
모모Philip: So long.
모모Grandpa: He's a lucky boy.Well, what do you say we get back to our fishing?
모모Philip: That's great idea. Uh-oh. It's probably the hospital. I have to get to a phone. It probably means we can't stay.
모모Robbie: That's OK.
모모Philip: One of my patients has a hight fever, and I have to go to the hospital. I'm sorry, Robbie. I guess I ruined your day.
모모Robbie: You didn't ruin my day, Dad. I understand. I really do.
모모Ellen: Why are you back so early?
모모Grandpa: Philip had to go back to the hospital.
모모Robbie: He had an emergency.
모모Ellen: Oh, that's too bad, Robbie. Did it spoil your fun?
모모Robbie: No, Mom. We had a great time.
모모Ellen: Well, did you do any fishing?
모모Robbie: Yeah, we caught lots of them. Look! They had a special on frozen fish down at the supermarket.
모모Ellen: Oh, you really had a bad day.
모모Grandpa: We had a good day. Robbie pulled a boy out of the water.
모모Robbie: And Dad saved his life. He's a terrific doctor,Mom.
모모Ellen: I know.
모모Philip: Hi, Pop. Hi, Son.
모모Robbie: Hello,Dad.
모모Philip: What a day!
모모Grandpa: How about a cup of coffee ,Son?
모모Philip: I'd love a cup of coffee..
모모Robbie: How was the patient?
모모Philip: She'll be fine.
모모Robbie: Was it serious?
모모Philip: No.
모모Robbie: Until today, I was never really interested in medicine.
모모Phinip: Well, it's hard work.
모모Robbie: Now I know.
모모Philip : I had a good time today, Robbie.
모모Robbie: Me,too.
모모Philip: Can we? When?
모모Philip: How about next Saturday?
모모Robbie: Won't you be busy?
모모Philip: I'm changing my schedule. Well, do we have a date?
모모Robbie: We sure do, Dad. Grandpa, can you come?
모모Grandpa: I have other plans, Robbie. But I think you two can have a good time together without me.
모모Philip: No, Dad, and certainly not without the right magic.
모모EPISODE 6 Thanksgiving
모모Act 1.
모모Ellen: OK, Philip. This is your third cup of coffee. We should get to work, or we won't be finished by dinnertime.
모모Philip: I guess we must.
모모Ellen: We must.
모모Philip: OK.The beginning of my famous Thanksgiving apple pie.One apple. Two apples. Three apples. Four apples
모모Ellen: Come on, Philip! Get busy with your famous apple pie. There's much mre to be done.
모모Philip: Now, the ingredients.
모모Philip: What goes into my apple pie besides apples? Ah, yes. Flour, sugar, butter.Butter, nice and cold and hard. OK, here are the walnuts. Last but not least, the reason my apple pie is famous-cinnamon. Cinnamon...Ellen, where's the cinnamon?
모모Ellen: If there is any cinnamon,it's in the cabinet with the salt and pipper.
모모Philip: Salt, pepper, dill weed, garlic powder,cinnamon. Ellen?
모모Ellen: Yes,Philip.
모모Philip: Is it possible that we forgot to buy cinnamon?
모모Ellen: Yes,it is possible that we forgot to buy cinnamon.
모모Philip Well, how can I make my famous apple pie without cinnamon?
모모Robbie: Good morning.
모모Ellen: Oh, hi, Robbie.Good morning.
모모Philip: Good morning. Robbie. Can you do me a favor?
모모Robbie: Sure, Dad.What?
모모Philip; Remember my apple pie on Thanksgiving? What do you love about it?
모모Robbie: The apples?
모모Philip: No. The sssss...
모모Robbie: Cinnamon!
모모Philip: Right.We don't have any cinnamon.
모모Robbie: I'll go down to Henry's grocery. He's always open. I'll get some for you.
모모Plilip: That's my boy!
모모Ellen: Oh, put your heavy jacket on, Robbie. It's cold outside.
모모Robbie: Alexandra might call. Tell her I'll call her right back.
모모Ellen: OK.
모모Philip; Thanks, Son.
모모Ellen: Uh, why does he always have to slam the door?
모모Ellen: Hello...Hello,Alexandra.How are you?... Fine. Robbie just went to the store.He'll be back sonn. He said he'll call you... Oh, oh, I see... Oh... certainly.Well, do you have the phone number there?...Oh... I see...Please, I know he wants to talk to you...Thank you, and happy Thanksgiving to you and your family, too. Try to come by later for dessert... Bye.That was Alexandra. She and the Molinas are going to spend Thanksgiving with their cousins.She doesn't have the phone number.
모모Philip: Oh, Robbie will be disappointed.
모모Ellen: He'll be grouchy. Maybe she'll call back. She promised.
모모Robbie: Here's your cinnamon, Pop. It was a dollar and sixty cents.You forgot to ask me for the change.
모모Philip: Or did you forget to give it to me?
모모Philip; Thanks, Son.
모모Ellen: Alexandra called.
모모Robbie: I'll call her back.
모모Ellen: She said she'll call you later. She's not at home.
모모Philip: You should have your breakfast, Son. Make you feel better. Protein, vitamins.
모모Robbie: She said she'll call back?
모모Ellen: Yes, she did.
모모Grandpa: Good morning, everyone! Happy Turkey Day? What's wrong?
모모Robbie: Nothing. Absolutely nothing.
모모Grandpa: What's gotten into him?
모모Ellen: He missed a phone call.
모모Grandpa: From...?
모모Philip: Yes, Alexandra.
모모Grandpa: It's nice to see young love... Oh, to be young again! Where's the coffee?
모모Act 2.
모모Grandpa: I love parades. The Thanksgiving Day parade is always such great fun. Look at that Superman balloon! Wowee! Just floating along high above Central Park West.Don't you just love it? Oh, and the bands and the music. John Philip Sousa. I love his music. Da dadas da da dada da da da da da dada. Oh,look at that float, Robbie.Look at those funny-looking clowns.
모모Robbie: It's for kids.
모모Grandpa: Maybe so, but parades always make me feel like a kid.Remember when you and your dad and I went to the Thanksgiving Day parade? You were Four or five years
모모old ,I think.
모모Robbie: Hello, hello... Oh,hi, Susan. How are you?... Here's Mom.
모모Ellen: Hello, Susan. Yes, I know, but he'll get over it . Good. Then you'll be here about five? Oh, fine. I look forward to seeing you and Harry and Michelle. Drive carefully. Good-bye.
모모Philip: Taste Ellen's turkey dressing. It's delicious.
모모Grandpa: I'm not surprised. It's Grandma's recipe.
모모Robbie: It's my favorite part of the meal.
모모Philip: What about my famous apple pie?
모모Robbie: Dad,your apple pie is my favorite dessert.
모모Philip: How's the parade?
모모Robbie: OK.
모모Robbie: Mom! Is it for me?
모모Ellen: No, Robbie.
모모Philip: Who was it?
모모Ellen: Wrong number. Philip, would you join me in the kitchen, please? It's getting late. We have vegetables to prepare.
모모Robbie: Can I help with anything?
모모Ellen: No, honey. You just relax with Grandpa.I'll get you to help serve later.
모모Grandpa: Ellen reminds me so much of Grandma.
모모Philip: What time does the Michigan football game come on?
모모Robbie: Four.
모모Ellen: Philip!
모모Philip: I'll be back to see the game.
모모Robbie: Grandpa,when did Dad graduate from Michigan?
모모Grandpa: Let me think. He graduated from medical school in 1960 and from the University of Michigan in 1956.
모모Robbie: did you go to Michigan, too,Grandpa?
모모Grandpa: Yup. I graduated in 1937.
모모Robbie: I've got to start thinking about college soon.
모모Act 3.
모모Philip: OK, everybody. I want to welcome Harry and his daughter Michelle to Thanksgiving with us.
모모Harry: Thank you, Dr.Stewart.
모모Philip: Call me Philip.
모모Harry: OK.
모모Philip: But first, I think we should take a moment and remember the meaning of Thanksgiving.
모모Harry: Philip, I took Michelle to a school play about the first Thanksgiving.
모모Philip: Well, why don't you tell us about that, Michelle?
모모Michelle: Thanksgiving was about the Pilgrims, the first settlers in America. They shared the first harvest with the Indians and gave thanks.
모모Philip; All right. Then in that spirit let each of us give thanks. Each in his own way.Who wants to begin?
모모Grandpa: I will. I give thanks for being here with my family and for being well, so I can enjoy you all.
모모Robbie: All right! We love you, Grandpa.
모모Susan: I'd like to give thanks for a healthy year, a good job, and for meeting Harry and Michelle.
모모Harry: We'd like to give thanks for meeting Susan and the Stewart family.
모모Michelle: I love you, Daddy.
모모Susan: Thanks, Harry. That was very kind of you.
모모Robbie: I'd like to give thanks for Grandpa coming to live with us. And I'd also like to thank my math teacher for giving me a passing grade. And call me , Alexandra.
모모Ellen: Oh,Robbie!
모모Grandpa: She'll call.
모모Richard; You go first, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: I'm thinking. You go first.
모모Richard: Well, you all know I'm working on my photo album.It's not finished yet. And I'd like to thank Marilyn for being so patient.
모모Marilyn: Thanks, Richard. I should thank you for encouraging me to keep working on my fashion designs I'm lucky to have a husband with an artistic eye.
모모Ellen: Oh, we have a lot to be thankful for. For the food on this table. Just like th Pilgrims.
모모Philip: I'll go along with that, Ellen.
모모Ellen: Well, help me serve, Robbie.
모모Harry: It was a wonderful meal, Mrs. Stewart. Thank you.
모모Richard: And now to see the end of the football game.
모모Philip: Exactly.
모모Ellen: Where are you going, Philip?
모모Philip: Remember, the Michigan football game? And Michigan needs a touchdown.
모모Ellen: Did you forget something?
모모Robbie: Dad, your famous apple pie.
모모Philip: Just let me see the score, Ellen.
모모Marilyn: Go ahead, Philip.We should all take a little break before dessert.
모모Ellen: Oh, who could that be? Oh, it must be Alexandra. I invited her to come by for dessert.
모모Robbie: You did?
모모Grandpa: I like Ellen.
모모Robbie: You know everyone, Alexandra.
모모Ellen: No, she doesn't know Harry Bennett and his daughter Michelle.
모모Alexandra: Nice to meet you.
모모Harry&Michelle: Hi.
모모Marilyn&Michelle: Hello,Alexandra.
모모Alexandra: Hi, Marilyn.Hi, Susa... Happy Thanksgiving.
모모Ellen: And Alexandra brought us a pumpkin pie.
모모Robbie: Please sit down, Alexandra. Dad, Richard-Alexandra's here.
모모Richard: Michigan needs a touchdown. Three minutes to play. Hi, Alexandra. Welcome.
모모Philip: Hello, Alexandra, Yes, Michigan needs a touchdown. One tiny little touchdown, with just three minutes to play.
모모Alexanda: You want Michigan to win.
모모Philip: How'd you guess?
모모Ellen: What happened?
모모Philip: We forgot to trun the over on .
모모Ellen: We did? Philip, why don't you go watch the last three minutes of the game.I will serve coffee and pumpkin pie.
모모Philip: OK. I'll be back in a few minutes.
모모Ellen: Robbie,would you bring the dessert plates. And, Marilyn, would you pour coffee, please.
모모Marilyn: Sure, Ellen.
모모Grandpa: How was your Thanksgiving dinner, Alexandra?
모모Alexandra: Just wouderful, Mr. Stewart. The Molinas are a large family. I love being with them.
모모Robbie: I'm glad you came by , Alexandra.
모모Alexandra: I am, too.
모모Philip: Touchdown! Touchdown! Touchdown!
모모Grandpa: Great Thanksgiving. Lots to be thankful for. Michigan scored a touchdown. Alexandra came by . And nobody misses Philip's famous apple pie.
모모Ellen: Oh, Grandpa!
모모Episode 7 Me's Bast Friend
모모Act 1.
모모Alexandra: Robbie, this new Walkman is absolutely wonderful.
모모Robbie: Richard and Marilyn bought it for me for my birthday.
모모Alexandra: They're so thoughtful. You are very lucky, Robbie, To have such a nice family.
모모Robbie: Is something wrong, Alexandra?
모모Alexandra: No, nothing.
모모Robbie: Yes, there is. I can tell. What's the matter? Come on, you can tell me .What's up?
모모Alexandra: I don't know. Something's wrong.
모모Robbie: OK, let's talk.
모모Alexandra: I received a letter from my partents this morning.
모모Robbie: Did they write some bad news?
모모Alexandra: No.
모모Robbie: Well, then why are you so sad?
모모Alexandra: I miss them. I miss them very much.
모모Robbie: I'm sorry. Alexandra. But I understand.
모모Alexandra: The Mollnas treat me so nicely, and I love being with you family so much... but when I received the letter with photographs of my family, I cried. I cried because I miss them all.
모모Robbie: You really miss your family, don't you?
모모Alexandra: Yes.I know I must seem silly. It's not like I have nobody. I Like the Molinas very much, and they're so kind to me.
모모Robbie: Hey, why don't we go out for a cheeseburger and French mes? That'll cheer you up. And you can use my Walkman.
모모Alexandra: That's a good idea. But if we go out, please don't complain about your math teacher or your math homework. I want to have fun.
모모Robbie: So do I.
모모Robbie: I have to turn off the lights, or else my father will get really angry. He says I never turn them out when I leave. If they come home and they're on...
모모Robbie: Do you hear something?
모모Alexandra: Yes. What was that?
모모Robbie: It sounded like a dog barking.
모모Alexandra: It sounded like a dog barking right here.
모모Robbie: Yeah.
모모Alexandra: A dog!
모모Robbie: A sprinel! Come on in! Make yourself at home.
모모Alexandra: Oh,you poor little thing. Come here.
모모Robbie: Come on.
모모Alexandra: Poor baby.
모모Robbie: Where did you come from?
모모Alexandra: Her name's Gemma, and she belongs to Mr.and Mrs.Levinson. There's a phone number-five five five...eight four four eight. Robbie, maybe you should call them and tell the Levinsons we have their cute little spaniel.
모모Robbie: I've always wanted a springer spaniel.She's so cute.
모모Operator: The number you ae calling-555-8448-is no longer in service.
모모Robbie: The number's no longer in sevice.
모모Alexandra: Oh, you poor, poor baby. You've lost your family.
모모Robbie: We'll find them. Don't worry, Alexandra.
모모Act 2.
모모Robbie: Don't worry, Alexandra. We'll find the owner.
모모Alexandra: How, Robbie?
모모Robbie: Let me think.
모모Alexandra: Gemma, sit. Good Gemma.Give me your paw.Good Gemma.This dog is well trained.
모모Robbie: With a little help from the ASPCA, the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. They're the ones.We once found a cat. She was caught in the branches of our tree.And Dad called the ASPCA.They came and solved the
모모problem.
모모Alexandra: Robbie, let's call them.
모모Robbie: Let me see-ASPCA....Here it is.ASPCA Animal Shelter. 555-7700.
모모Linda: Hello, ASPCA.
모모Robbie: Hello,my name is Robbie Stewart. I have a lost dog I'd like to bring to you. How late are you open?
모모Linda: We're open till nine P.M.
모모Robbie: Thank you. I'll bring the dog over by nine.
모모Linda: Thanks. Bye.
모모Robbie: Thanks. Good-bye.
모모Alexandra: They're still open?
모모Robbie: They're open until nine 0'clock. We have two and a half hours. Let's take Gemma by there now. They'll find the owner.
모모Alexandra: I hope so. I'm so sad to see this little dog without her family.
모모Robbie: I'm sure they'll find the owner . But if they don't, I'll adopt her. She's so cute. Look at those eyes. She's hard to resist .Don't you just love her?
모모Alexandra: I'd like to keep her, too. But I'll be going home to Greece at the end of the semester. She just wants love and affection.Come on, Robbie. Let's get her to the animal shelter, so they can find her owners quickly. Don't worry, Gemma. We'll get you home. It's not easy being away from home.
모모Robbie: Come on, Poochie. Atta girl! Let's go .We're off to the animal shelter.
모모Linda: Your name?
모모Robbie: Robbie Stewart. And this is Alexandra Pappas.
모모Linda: Your name will do, Mr.Stewart. Your address?
모모Robbie: 46Linden Street, Riverdale.
모모Linda: Where did you find the dog?
모모Alexandra: She found us.
모모Linda: You tried calling the number on the collar?
모모Robbie: Yes, but the number's no longer in service.
모모Linda: And there's no address on the dog tag?
모모Alexandra: There's no other information.
모모Linda: No ID number. Without that, it's hard.
모모Alexandra: You will try to find the dog's owner.
모모Linda: Oh, we'll try, believe me.
모모Robbie: And if you don't?
모모Linda: Yes?
모모Robbie: If you don't... can I...can I adopt the dog?
모모Linda: Why, yes. If the owners don't claim the dog in forty-eight hours, then you can apply for adoption.
모모Robbie: How do I do that?
모모Alexandra: You really want to ?
모모Robbie: Yes. I'm serious. If no one comes to claim Gemma, I'd like to adopt her.
모모Linda: It's not diffcult.
모모Act 3.
모모Linda: OK. If you want to adopt an animal, first we need to know some references.
모모Robbie: References? People we know?
모모Linda: Friends, teachers... We need to talk to some people about you We want to be sure that you're responsible and that you can take good care of an animal. Then you have to till out this form about your family background.
모모Robbie: Is that it?
모모Linda: No, there's more. We need to know about your history with animals. Have you ever owned an animal?
모모Robbie: Yes. We had a cat when I was eight years old. I love cats.
모모Linda: Do you have any animals now?
모모Robbie: Umfortunately,no.
모모Alexcandra: Anything else?
모모Linda: We also lide to know your reasons for wanting an animal.
모모Alexcandra: Just to hold it and cuddle with it. Just to have as a pet I love animals.
모모Robbie: To have a friend-a pal. You know, man's best friend is his dog.
모모Linda: And one thing more. If you're under twenty-one years of age...
모모Robbie: That's me.
모모Linda: Then an adult must sign for you.
모모Alexandra: Uh-oh.
모모Robbie: No problem.My parents will think it's a good idea. I'll be back with them.
모모Alexandra: If the real owners don't come to claim Gemma...
모모Linda: After forty-eight huors. But please call first.
모모Robbie: Thanks for your information and for being so helpful.
모모Linda: It's my pleasure. Nice talking to both of you.
모모Robbie: Thanks again. Bye.
모모Alexandra: Maybe the real owners will come to claim her.
모모Robble: Her eyes look so sad. She must really miss them.
모모Linda: I see you're both animal lovers
모모Robbie: We are.
모모Alexandra: Good-bye, Miss Aborn. We'll call in a couple of days.
모모Linda: Good-bye, and thanks for bringing Gemma in.
모모Robbie: Bye.
모모Alexandra: I keep thinking about the dog-about Gemma, alone in the animal shelter.
모모Robbie: I know. But I promse you, Alexandra, the dog is just fine.They're very kind to the animals.
모모Alexandra: I know they are. I mean about her being alone. Even if they are kind to Gemma, she's still alone, without her family
모모Waiter: Ready, folks?
모모Robbie: Are you ready, Alexandra?
모모Alexandra: Yes, I'm ready. I'll have the chefs salad, please.
모모Robbie: I will have a cheeseourger, medium rare, with raw onion, and French fries, please.
모모Waiter: Anything to drink?
모모Alexandra: A diet cola, please.
모모Robbie: Ginger ale with lots of ice for me, thank you.
모모Waiter: I've got it. Thanks.
모모Robbie: Aren't you surprised that the animal shelter is so careful about finding homes for the animals?
모모Alexandra: No, I'm not.
모모Waiter: And a cheeseburger, medium rare, with onion and French fries .And a ginger ale with lots of ice. Salad dressing?
모모Robbie: Hey, I wanted you to hear my new sound system when the dog scratched on the front door.Let's finish eating, and then we'll go back to my house. I want you to hear my new tapes. I've got some areat new dance music.
모모Robbie: Hell.Stewart residence.
모모Linda: Hello. Is Robbie Stewart there?
모모Robbie: This is he. Who's this?
모모Linda: This is Linda Aborn from the animal shelter.
모모Robbie: It's Linda from the animal shetter. Yes, Linda. Hi.
모모Linda: We have good news and bad news, Robbie.
모모Robbie: Oh?
모모Linda: The good news is that the Levinsons have come by to pick up the dog. The bad news is, you won't be able to adopt the dog.
모모Robbie: That's OK.
모모Linda: Come by one day and look at some of the other dogs. I'm suer there's one for you. Thanks, Robbie. And the Levinsons thank you for bringing their dog to us.
모모Robbie: Thanks, Linda. Bye.
모모Alexandra: The owners clairned Gemma?
모모Robbie: That's right.
모모Alexandra: I'm glad for the dog.
모모Robbie: I guess I am , too. She said if I come by, She'll help me fine another dog.
모모Alexandra: Come on .Let's dance.
모모Episode 8 You're Goingto Be Fine
모모Act 1.
모모Philip: Molly, I need your special talent for handing special maters.
모모Molly: Like what special matters?
모모Philip: Well, I have a scheduling problem.
모모Molly: Yes?
모모Philip: I have three tonsillectomies set for Friday with Dr. Earl.
모모Molly: Yes?
모모Philip: I need to fit a fourth operation into his schedule. And...I know you can do it.
모모Molly: Who's the patient?
모모Philip: Carl Herrera. The boy has infected tonsils, and we should remove them as soon as possible.
모모Molly: Well, I'll try to arrange th schedule, Dr. Stewart. But it's not going to be easy.
모모Philip: I know you'll be able to take care of it.
모모Philip: Well, Mrs. Herrera, Carl will be perfectly fine after we remove his tonsils.
모모Mother: Thank you for your reassurance, Dr. Stewart. He's had so many colds and sore throats recently.
모모Philip: Well, It's a very easy operation, Carl. You won't feel a thing.
모모Carl: But when do they do it?
모모Philip: This Friday.
모모Carl: But Saturday's my birthday.
모모Philip: Well, we could reschedule the operation, Mrs. Herrera, but I don't want to put it off too long.
모모Mother: No, I think it's important to do it now. We can have a birthday party for you, Carl, when you come out of the hospital.
모모Philip: Nurse Baker, would you come in, please?
모모Molly: Come with me, Carl. You and I will talk this over.
모모Mother: She has a special way with kids.
모모Philip: She sure does.
모모Molly: Carl, does your throat hurt?
모모Carl: Yes.
모모Molly: OK. Do you want to get better?
모모Carl: Yes.
모모Molly: OK. We want you to get better, too. You'll have your tonsils out tomorrow, and you won't get so many colds anymore.
모모Carl: But if I have my tonsils out tomorrow, I'll miss my birthday party on Saturday.
모모Molly: I know. It's a problem, isn't it? Let me try to work something out.
모모Carl: What?
모모Molly: I have to think about it.
모모Carl: You're fooling me .
모모Molly: Oh, I'm not, Carl. Give me a chance to think about it, and I'll come up with something.
모모Carl: A surprise?
모모Molly: Maybe. But you just put on your pajamas and robe, and I'll think of a surprise.
모모Carl: Will it hurt?
모모Molly: No. There are other boys and girls here, and they're having their tonsils out. You'll meet them.
모모Carl: I don't want to.
모모Molly: Change your clothes, Carl. Everything will be just fine.
모모Act 2.
모모Molly: OK. Do you know how to play charades?
모모Molly: Frank, you've never played charades?
모모Frank: Nope.
모모Molly: Carl, you're sure you've never played? OK, Betty, Tim, and Frank. We're going to play charades. Frank, you can learn as we go. And, Carl, you join in at anytime. OK, let me think. OK, I've got one .All right.
모모Betty: A movie! A movie!
모모Molly: Right. A movie. OK.
모모Tim: Six words. It has six words.
모모Frank: That's easy. I can play.
모모Molly: Good. OK. We've got a movie. The title.
모모Betty: Six words.
모모Molly: Right. First word...
모모Betty: Sounds like.
모모Tim: Sounds like...
모모Molly: You got that part right. Yes.
모모Betty: Sounds like...
모모Time: Sounds like what?
모모Frank: Sounds like no.
모모Molly: Absolutely right, Frank. Sounds like no. OK. We've got a movie. Six words. The first word sounds like no.
모모Frank: Row. Row.
모모Tim: Go.
모모Molly: Nope.
모모Tim: Show. That's It-show.
모모Molly: No...OK...
모모Betty: Snow.
모모Molly: Absolutely right, Betty. Sounds like no-snow. OK, a movie. Six words. The first word is snow.
모모Frank: This is fun.
모모Molly: Oh, OK.
모모Betty: The fifth word.
모모Molly: Right, fifth word.
모모Tim: Seven?
모모Molly: Absolutely right. Very good. The fifth word is seven. OK, we've got a movie. The first word is snow. Fifth word, seven.
모모Betty: I got it! I got it!
모모Frank: Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.
모모Betty: I got it!
모모Frank: I got it!
모모Molly: Carl, now you know charades. Why don't join us?
모모Carl: I don't like charades. It's for babies.
모모Molly: Oh, I like it
모모Carl: Well, they're babies.
모모Betty: You're a sore loser.
모모Tim: Yeah.
모모Molly: No arguing. Save your voices. Between now and tomorrow you're all going to have your tonsils out. And you won't be able to speak for a while. So save your voices till then.
모모Philip: Hi, gang. Hi, everybody. Well, what's going on?
모모Molly: I sure I am glad to see you, Dr. Stewart. This is a rough group.
모모Carl: I didn't want to play charades, so they're angry at me.
모모Philip: Why don't you want to play?
모모Carl: Because I don't want to be here. I don't want my tonsils out.
모모Philip: Why not?
모모Carl: Because my birthday is tomorrow. My mother promised me a birthday party with a clown.
모모Molly: But you can have on when you go home, Carl.
모모Carl: But my birthday is tomorrow.
모모Philip: I'm sorry, Carl.
모모Molly: Carl, you'll have your party when you go home.
모모Carl: But it won't be on my birthday! And you promised me a surprise.
모모Act 3.
모모Molly: It hurts, doesn't it?
모모Molly: You'll feel better tomorrow, Betty, believe me. Only one day, and it won't hurt as much. Do you feel like eating? Having some dinner? Oh, don't look so sad. Let me tell you about your dinner. It's ice cream
모모Molly: Ice cream. All kinds of flavors. Chocolate.
모모Molly: Strawberry?
모모Molly: Vanilla?
모모Molly: Vanilla, too?
모모Molly: I see you're feeling better already, Betty. So you will have dinner?
모모Molly: OK, honey, we'll see to it that you have strawberry and vanilla ice cream. Just rest now. You need some rest to help you get better quickly. Hi Frank. How you doing?
모모Molly: Oh, come on now. You're a big boy. It doesn't hurt that much, does it? Oh, I'm sorry it hurts so much, and won't be able to have dinner. You're just going to have to have ice cream. Yes, Ice cream. Lots of flavors. Want to hear them?
모모Molly: Chocolate?
모모Molly: Then chocolate it is. One scoop or two?
모모Molly: Three scoops?
모모Molly: Then three it will be.
모모Molly: You want three scoops also?
모모Molly: Chocolate, too?
모모Molly: Well, I see you're feeling better.
모모Molly: Well, at least you're acting like you feel better. Three scoops of chocolate ice cream for Tim coming up. Hi, Carl. How you doing?
모모Molly: I know it hurts. But it'll be better tomorrow. In the meantime, what would you like?
모모Carl: Surprise.
모모Molly: A surprise? I promised you a surprise, didn't I? And it wasn't just ice cream, was it?
모모Molly: Your birthday is tomorrow, isn't it?
모모Molly: Well, maybe, just maybe, there will be a surprise. But first you have to smile. I just want to see one smile from you.
모모Molly: No smile, no surprise . That's the deal. No smile, no surprise. If you want a surprise, then you've got to smile first.
모모Molly: How you all doing? Well, I'm glad you're feeling better because we have a little surprise for you today. It's Carl's birthday, and we have Popo the Clown to entertain you. And here he is -- Popo the Clown.
모모Philip: Happy birthday, Carl. Happy birthday. All right everybody. OK, Carl. It's yur birthday. What's your wish? What would you like?
모모Philip: Hmm?
모모Molly: You want to play charades?
모모Episode 9 It's Up to You
모모Act 1.
모모Robbie: Who is it?
모모Philip: Dad.
모모Robbie: Come on in, Dad.
모모Philip: I thought you might be hungry. I brought you a chicken sandwich and a glass of milk.
모모Robbie: I am hungry. Thanks, Dad. What time is it, anyway?
모모Philip: Ten 0'clock. What are you working on?
모모Robbie: I'm writing a story for the high-school paper.
모모Philip: Can't you finish it tomorrow?
모모Robbie: No, I have to turn it in in the morning.
모모Philip: What's it about?
모모Robbie: I'm writing an article on the feelings about graduation.
모모Philip: And...how do you feel?
모모Robbie: Me? A little scared. And excited, too.
모모Philip: I felt the same way.
모모Robbie: The scary part's leaving home and moving to college.
모모Philip: Oh, leaving home is part of growing up. Well, don't work all night.
모모Robbie: I don't mind. I enjoy writing.
모모Philip: Well, maybe you should think about becoming a writer.
모모Robbie: Maybe I should.
모모Philip; You have lots of time to decide.
모모Robbie: That's the worst part-making decisions.
모모Philip: You'll be OK. Good night, Son.
모모Robbie: Good night, Dad.
모모Grandpa&
모모Philip: "Hail to the victors valiant, Hail to the conquering heroes, Hail, Hail to Michigan, The champions of the West!"
모모Philip: Ah, good morning Robbie.
모모Robbie: Good morning, Dad.
모모Grandpa: How's my grandson?
모모Robbie: Fine, Grandpa. Fine! What's all the cheering about Did the University f Michigan another football game?
모모Grandpa: Better than that. Tell him Philip.
모모Philip: I just spoke with Charley Rafer.
모모Robbie: Who's Charley Rafer?
모모Philip: He's the Dean of Admission for the University of Michigan.
모모Grandpa: And it turns out he's a classmate of Philip's.
모모Philip: We were both on the tennis team.
모모Robbie: Great!
모모Philip: It is great. He's going to be in New York tomorrow to interview applicants for admission.
모모Grandpa: And he's agreed to fit you into his schedule.
모모Robbie: But I may not want to go to Michigan.
모모Philip: It's one of the best schools in the country, Robbie. I studied medicine there. Your grandfather went to the Engineering School there.
모모Robbie: I know that, but...
모모Grandpa: You said you wanted to be a doctor like your father.
모모Robbie: Not exactly.
모모Grandpa: You couldn't pick a finer medical school than Michigan.
모모Robbie: Yes, I know that.
모모Philip: Let's meet with Charley at the university club. Ten 0'clock tomorrow morning. It doesn't mean you're going Michigan.
모모Grandpa: It doesn't mean you have to be a doctor. But the interview will be good experience for you.
모모Robbie: In that case, it's OK. Dad, growing up means making my own decisions, doesn't it?
모모Philip: You're right, Robbie. But, like your Grandpa suggested, have the interview.
모모Grandpa: And then make your own decision.
모모Robbie: That sounds fine.
모모Philip: I know it's sudden, Robbie, but this is an important opportunity. We'll head down there first thing tomorrow morning. OK?
모모Robbie: Sure, Dad.
모모Philip: I want you to know something, Son. I'm...very proud of you.
모모Robbie: Thanks, Dad.
모모Philip: Well, I've got an appointment at the hospital. I'll see you all at dinnertime.
모모Robbie: Bye, Dad.
모모Grandpa: Is something still wrong, Robbie?
모모Robbie: I'll be OK.
모모Grandpa: Going away to college for the first time always makes one a little nervous.
모모Robbie: I guess so. I'll be OK. I just need time to think.
모모Act 2.
모모Philip: Sorry, Robbie. Sorry to be late this morning, but, well, we've still got some time for a cup of coffee. I can't wait to see my old pal Charley Rafer.
모모Robbie: Neither can I.
모모Philip: So you thought about it, huh?
모모Robbie: Yes, I have, Dad.
모모Philip: Well, I'm glad. I knew you'd realize that this interview could be an important experience for you.
모모Robbie: I came to the conclusion.
모모Philip: That's very wise, Robbie. Very wise. Now let's head off for the city and the university club.
모모Robbie: Thanks, Dad.
모모Philip: Thanks...for what?
모모Robbie: Thanks for hearing me out. And...
모모Philip: And...?
모모Robbie: And thanks for being such an understanding father.
모모Philip: Well, thank you, Robbie. Thank you.
모모Dean: Philip Stewart! It's great to see you!
모모Philip: Charley Rafer-you look as young as ever.
모모Dean: You must be Robbie.
모모Robbie: Hi.
모모Philip: Yes, this is my youngest son Robbie. Robbie, I want you to meet one of the best tennis players on the Michigan team-Charley Rafer.
모모Robbie: Nice to meet you, Dean Rafer.
모모Dean: Well, are you as good a tennis player as your dad?
모모Robbie: No, I'm not very good at it.
모모Philip: Frankly, neither was I. Charley was the star of the team.
모모Dean: Yeah. Thanks. Well, how've you been, Philip?
모모Philip: Oh, working too hard.
모모Dean: Doesn't show. How's Ellen?
모모Philip: Fine, thank you. And how's Marge?
모모Dean: She's still giving the toughest English history exams in the school and loving every minute of it. And speaking of minutes, I have interviews until noon, so why don't we get right to work?
모모Philip: Can you have lunch with us later?
모모Dean: I'd love to , Philip, but I'm afraid I can't. I'm only here two days, and I have interviews with twenty-six applicants.
모모Philip: I understand. Well, thanks. I'll wait outside. Good luck, Son.
모모Dean: Did you bring your transcript from high school?
모모Robbie: Yes, sir. Right here.
모모Dean: Thank you. Please sit down.
모모Dean: I see under "activities" that you've been writing for the school paper.
모모Robbie: Yes, sir.
모모Dean: What kinds of articles have you written?
모모Robbie: All kinds-sports, editorials, theater reviews. You name it, I've written it.
모모Dean: Hmmm. Well, have you ever thought of becoming a journalist?
모모Robbie: A professional writer? Not until recently.
모모Dean: Michigan has a fine School of Journalism.
모모Robbie: Yes, I know that.
모모Dean: You seem to have some reservations.
모모Robbie: I'm a little uncertain.
모모Dean: It's been very nice talking to you.
모모Robbie: Nice talking to you, sir.
모모Dean: One piece of advice. The most important thing is for you to decided your own future.
모모Robbie: Yes, sir. Good-bye. Dean Rafer.
모모Dean: Good-bye. Robbie. Good luck.
모모Act 3.
모모Mike: I had an interview today, too. I had a great interview with Admissions at Columbia University.
모모Robbie: Really? What did they say? Will you get into the school?
모모Mike: Well, they didn't say anything for sure. But I figure that with my grades and with my personality, I'll have no problem.
모모Robbie: Columbia's a terrific school. What are you going to do?
모모Mike: Do? I don't know. I also applied to NYU.
모모Robbie: You sound excited about Columbia. What's your problem, Mike?
모모Mike: Indecision. Indecision. It's not easy, and this is an important decision we have to make. What about you? How as your interview with Michigan?
모모Robbie: The interview was fine.
모모Mike: It's a great college.
모모Robbie: It is. My father would like me to go there. He and my Grandpa both went there.
모모Mike: Great medical school, too.
모모Robbie: I know.
모모Mike: You can follow in your father's footsteps.
모모Robbie: Ah! I'd like to follow in my own footsteps, Mike.
모모Mike: What do you want to study?
모모Robbie: I've been thinking. I think I want to study journalism to be a reporter-a newspaperman.
모모Mike: You do a pretty good job on the Riverdale High School paper.
모모Robbie: And I've been thinking about it a lot lately.
모모Mike: Have you discussed it with your parents?
모모Robbie: No. But I have to.
모모Mike: OK. Let's talk.
모모Philip: Hi, Dad. Everything's fine. I was just waiting for your to get home so we could talk.
모모Philip: Anything special you want to talk about?
모모Robbie: There is, Dad.
모모Philip; I'm listening.
모모Robbie: Well, I know you and Mom have given up a lot to save money for my college tuition.
모모Philip: We want you to go to college, Robbie.
모모Robbie: I know. I do.
모모Philip: But?
모모Robbie: Well, I've Thought a lot about which college, and one of them is Columbia.
모모Philip: Columbia? Why Columbia?
모모Robbie: First, they have an excellent School of Journalism.
모모Philip: They do. And your friends are planning to go to Columbia?
모모Robbie: That's only part of it. It's complicated. I'll try to explain. Mike and I had a hamburger this afternoon, and we talked.
모모Philip: Yes?
모모Robbie: Well, we talked about a lot of thing .He applied to Columbia, and his interview was very successful. He thinks he'll be accepted, and he really wants to go there.
모모Philip: Dean Rafer called me today. He told me he was very impressed with you.
모모Robbie: He's a nice man. He was very kind.
모모Philip: He told me you had some doubts about wanting to go to Michigan.
모모Robbie: Yes. I do. I'm just not sure about what I want to do.
모모Philip: That's OK.
모모Robbie: You understand?
모모Philip: Let me tell you something, Robbie. Something that might be surprising to you.
모모Robbie: What? Tell me.
모모Philip: Well, Grandpa wanted me to study engineering, like him. Well, I wasn't clear about my future, but I knew engineering was not for me.
모모Robbie: What did you tell Grandpa?
모모Philip: The truth.
모모Robbie: Then you're not upset about my not wantin to go into medicine?
모모Philip: I'm not upset at all. I'm just happy that we're able to talk about it.
모모Robbie: I am too, Dad.
모모Philip: I suppose you want to apply to Columbia.
모모Robbie: Yes, but I also wanted to apply to several other colleges.
모모Philip: I thought you wanted to go to Columbia.
모모Robbie: Well, I might want to go to Columbia. But I might not. I just want to be able to make my own decision.
모모Philip: You're a real Stewart!
모모Robbie: And if I think about it long enough, you never know...
모모Philip: Never know what?
모모Robbie: If I make my own decision, I might choose Michigan.
모모Philip: Robbie, you're something! You know, when I was your age, said exactly the same thing to Grandpa.
모모Episode 10 Smell the Flowers
모모Act 1.
모모Sam: Good morning, Susan.
모모Susan: Good morning, Sam . What's the schedule today?
모모Sam: Ten 0'clock, telephone FAO Schwarz about the new twin baby dolls.
모모Susan: OK.
모모Sam: Telephone Mrs. Zaskey at the advertising agency.
모모Susan: I did that. Go on.
모모Sam: Eleven 0'clock, approve the sketches for the toy spaceship.
모모Susan: Where are they?
모모Sam: Right here.
모모Susan: Did you look at them?
모모Sam: Yes, I did.
모모Susan: What do you think of the spaceship?
모모Sam: I think the kids'll love it.
모모Susan: Would you show me the drawings, please?
모모Sam: Huh.
모모Susan: Now, what else is on the schedule today?
모모Sam: Well, at one o'clock you have a lunch appointment with Mr.Levine, the client from the Toytown Stores.
모모Susan: Where?
모모Sam: At Rossano's.
모모Susan: Hmm. Anything else?
모모Sam: At four o'clock, you have a meeting with the production staff in the conference room.
모모Susan: Make sure everybody is at that meeting.
모모Sam: Will do. At six you're meeting Mr.Ozawa.
모모Susan: Oh, yes. Are his models here?
모모Sam: They're in my office.
모모Susan: I'd like to see them.
모모Sam: Right.
모모Susan: What else?
모모Susan: Come on, Sam...
모모Sam: You work hard, Susan. When was your last day off?
모모Susan: Hmm. I can't remember.
모모Sam: You really ought to take some time off.
모모Susan: What for?
모모Sam: To enjoy the simple things in life...
모모Susan: I know, Sam. Maybe soon.
모모Sam: To smell the flowers.
모모Susan: Oh, wait a minute. What's today' date?
모모Sam: Today is the twelfth. Why?
모모Susan: It seems to me I scheduled something else.
모모Sam: There's nothing else in the appointment book.
모모Susan: I'm sure I did. Oh, well, I'll probably remember it later.
모모Sam: I hope it isn't important.
모모Susan: Hmm. It's probably nothing. OK, let's get started. Would you call Priscilla Smith at FAO Schwarz, please?
모모Sam: Right.
모모Sam These are the models from the Japanese film maker.
모모Susan: Thank you. Just put them on my desk.
모모Sam: And the new drawings for the toy spaceship.
모모Susan: Wonderful. That was fast.
모모Sam: We have a new artist. She's very talented.
모모Susan: What time is it, anyway? My watch stopped.
모모Sam: It's eleven thirty.
모모Susan: What time is my lunch date with Bill Levine.
모모Sam: One 0'clock.
모모Susan: Remind me to leave at twelve forty-five.
모모Sam: Did you remember your other appointment for today?
모모Susan: No, but I have a feeling it's going to be too late when I do remember.
모모Susan: Yes, Sam?
모모Sam: I just solved the mystery.
모모Susan: What did I forget?
모모Sam: You have some guests in the reception room.
모모Susan: What? Who?
모모Sam: Mr. Harry Bennett and his daughter.
모모Susan: I remember! Oh... Harry! I made a lunch date with him and his daughter weeks ago.
모모Sam: Is he a client?
모모Susan: He's a friend.
모모Sam: Well, He's here with his daughter to have lunch.
모모Susan: I met her at Thanksgiving, and I promised to have lunch with both of them today.
모모Sam: Yes, indeed. What are you going to do about your appointment with Mr.Levine?
모모Susan: Any suggestions? Oh!
모모Act 2.
모모Susan: Hi, Michelle. Hello, Harry. It's nice to see you again.
모모Michelle: Hello.
모모Harry: Hi, Susan. We have both been excited about seeing you and having lunch with you today. Michelle picked these flowers out for you.
모모Michelle: Daddy, can we go soon?
모모Harry: We're going to go to lunch in a few minutes, honey.
모모Michelle: But I'm thirsty.
모모Harry: OK. You go out and get a drink of water at the fountain.
모모Susan: The fountain is over there, Michelle. Near the Exit sign.
모모Michelle: Thank you.
모모Harry: Michelle is a little shy.
모모Susan: I used to be that way when I was her age. Harry, if Michelle doesn't want to go, we don't have to.
모모Harry: She'll be fine. Remember, I haven't dated anyone else since her mother died. This is a little difficult for her. Are you ready to go?
모모Susan: Yes. But could you wait one minute? I have a call to make. Would you excuse me?
모모Susan: Sam, get Mr. Levine a Toytown Stores on the telephone for me, please.
모모Sam: Right. Hello. Susan Stewart calling Mr. Levine, Susan Stewart. I find myself in an barrassing situation. I made another lunch date for today and forgot to enter it in my appointment book. Can you and I meet for drinks tomorrow? I'd really appreciate it... Yes...Thank you...Tomorrow at five o'clock at the Biltrnore. I'll see you then.
모모thank you, Mr.Levine.
모모Waiter: Welcome to the South Street Restaurant, folks. What'll it be?
모모Harry: What do you recommend?
모모Waiter: Well, the crab salad's always a big hit.
모모Harry: Susan, would you like the crab salad?
모모Susan: I'd love the crab salad.
모모Harry: Michelle, would you like to try the crab salad, too?
모모Michelle: OK, Daddy.
모모Harry: We'll have three crab salads and a pitcher of lemonade.
모모Waiter: Help yourself to celery and carrots and other vegetables.
모모Harry: We used to catch crabs.
모모Susan: Where was that?
모모Harry: We had a summer house on Fire island. Do you remember, Michelle?
모모Michelle: Sure. You and Mommy used to take me on the ferryboat.
모모Harry: Sometimes, at night, we would go down to the beach and catch crabs, remember?
모모Michelle: With a piece of meat on a string!
모모Harry: Right. Well, I think I'm going to go get us all some vegetables.
모모Waiter: There you go.
모모Susan: Thank you.
모모Waiter: And some ice-cold lemonade.
모모Susan: Thank you.
모모Waiter: Enjoy it.
모모Susan: Michelle, can I help you with the lemonade?
모모Michelle: No, thank you, I'll wait for my father.
모모Susan: Michelle, can we have a talk?
모모Michelle: Sure.
모모Susan: I know you miss your mother.
모모Michelle: You do? Susan: Yes. And I'm not trying to take her place.
모모Michelle: Then why are you and Daddy spending so much time together?
모모Susan: Because we like each other. And right now, he needs a friend.
모모Michelle: I'm his friend.
모모Susan: I know you are.
모모Michelle: Sometimes he's very sad.
모모Susan: And so are you, I think.
모모Michelle: Sometimes.
모모Susan: I'd like to be your friend, too. Will you let me be your friend, Michelle?
모모Harry: So, what were you two talking about?
모모Michelle: Just girl talk, daddy. It's too hard to explain.
모모Harry: You're probably right. Well, let's get started.
모모Act 3.
모모Susan: Oh, it's a quarter to four, and I have a production meeting at four.
모모Harry: I planned to take you for a ride in Central Park in a horse and carriage.
모모Susan: Harry, I'd love to , but I have work to do.
모모Harry: OK. We'll walk back to your office with you. It's so nice out. I decided to forget about my accounting problems and just enjoy this beautiful spring day. Take the time, Susan.
모모Susan: I know I should, but... well, there are too many things to do.
모모Harry; I understand. I'll go for a ride with Michelle.
모모Susan: Right. Well, I had a really nice time.
모모Harry: So did I.
모모Michelle: So did I. I'm sorry you can't come with us, Susan.
모모Susan: So am I.
모모Harry: Bye-bye.
모모Susan: Harry! Michelle! Can you wait till I make a phone call?
모모Harry; Sure.
모모Sam: Susan Stewart's office.
모모Susan: Sam, this is Susan.
모모Sam: Hi. How was lunch?
모모Susan: Fine.
모모Sam: You're late. The production department's waiting in the conference room.
모모Susan: I know. Ask Paul Smith to fill in for me. He knows everything about the production schedule, and he can answer any questions.
모모Sam: Right.
모모Susan: Don't tell anyone, but I'm taking a little time to smell the flowers.
모모Sam: Good for you. It'll be our secret.
모모Susan: But schedule another production meeting for tomorrow. I'll be back for my six o'clock appointment with Mr. Ozawa.
모모Sam: OK, Susan. And have a nice afternoon.
모모Susan: Thanks
모모Harry: She likes you.
모모Susan: I know. I like her.
모모Harry: How'd you do it?
모모Susan: We had a talk.
모모Harry: About what?
모모Susan: Life.
모모harry: And what did you decide?
모모Susan: That's a secret...between us women.
모모Episode 11 A Place of Our Own
모모Act 1.
모모Marilyn: Ellen, I'd like your opinion
모모Ellen: About what?
모모Marilyn: Well, Richard and I feel that with a baby coming we need to have our own place to live.
모모Ellen: Oh.
모모Marilyn: Well, what do you think about Richard and me looking for a small house or an apartmnt at this point in our lives?
모모Ellen: We love having you here, and there is room, and...and when the baby comes, the baby can stay in your room for a while.
모모Marilyn: Richard feels we need to find a small house.
모모Ellen: I remember when I was pregnant with Richard. Philip and I were living with Grandma and Grandpa. Philip was a young doctor, and he kept talking about having a house of our own. It's natural.
모모Marilyn: What did you do ?
모모Ellen: We looked at a lot of houses.
모모Marilyn: Did you find one?
모모Ellen: Oh, not at first. We couldn't afford it. Grandpa wanted to led us the money to buy one, but Philip is too independent. He didn't want to borrow any money.
모모Marilyn: Sounds like Richard.
모모Ellen: They're all alike. Richard is a real Stewart. He's independent, and sometimes just stubbom.
모모Marilyn: When did you buy a house?
모모Ellen: After Richard was born. I was teaching music, and Philip was opening his first medical office.
모모Marilyn: Where was the house?
모모Ellen: Right here in Riverdate. Of course, it was a small house, but just right for us.
모모Marilyn: It's funny. History repeats itself. Now Richard and I are having a baby, and we probably won't be able to afford a house right away, either.
모모Ellen: Why don't you look at some houses, Marilyn?
모모Marilyn: Good idea.
모모Ellen: Look in the real-estate section of Sunday's Times. You'll learn a lot.
모모Marilyn: Maybe we should speak to a real-estate agent about a house.
모모Ellen: And a bank about a mortgage.
모모Marilyn: I'll talk to Richard about it. I think it's a good idea, Ellen. We can learn a lot by asking.
모모Ellen: And if I can be of any help, let me know. As a matter of fact, my friend Virginia Martinelli is a real-estate agent.
모모Marilyn: Good.
모모Ellen: You won't believe this, but she sold us our first house and this one.
모모Marilyn: Well, I'll tell Richard, and we'll go to see her. Do you think the skirt length is right, Ellen? Do you think it's too long?
모모Ellen: I think the skirt is just right. Are you planning to attach a train to it?
모모Marilyn: No. No train. Just the dress. But I am going to make a headpiece of lace.
모모Ellen: That dress is gorgeous.
모모Marilyn: Thanks, Ellen. And thanks for the advice about the house. I'll talk to Richard about it the minute the comes home.
모모Ellen: And remember, we love having you here. There's no need to rush.
모모Act 2.
모모Virginia: I remember yuor parents' first house very well. It was on Spring Avenue, near the park.
모모Richard: I grew up in that house.
모모Virginia: Yes, and you were such a cute baby.
모모Marilyn : I've seen pictures of him. He had blond hair.
모모Virginia: I've been friendly with the Stewart family for a long time, so It's my pleasure to help you find a house now.
모모Richard: Well, we're not sure we can afford one.
모모Marilyn: But we'd like to find ut about the possibilities.
모모Virginia: That's a good idea. I love your house on Linden Street. I sold your father that house seventeen years ago.
모모Marilyn: Really?
모모Richard: Yes, Mom was pregnant with Robbie then, and they needed the extra room.
모모Virginia: I hear you're expecting a baby, Mrs.Stewart.
모모Marilyn: Mmm-hmm. So we will be needing more room.
모모Virginia: Oh, so you don't need something immediately?
모모Richard: No. But in five or six months...
모모Marilyn: And time passes so quickly.
모모Virginia: Yes, it does. Well, when you called, you gave me enough information about your salaries and your savings. So I have a good idea about your financial situation. Let me show your some pictures of houses.
모모Marilyn: With two bedrooms?
모모Virginia: Yes, I think I can show you some. Of course, they won't be in Riverdale. The cost of housing's too high for you here.
모모Richard: I haven't thought about living anywhere else. We've always lived in this area.
모모Marilyn: Where should we look for a house, Mrs.Martinelli?
모모Virginia: Well, we have an office in Mount Kisco. It's a lovely area, and it's only about an hour's rive from here. Here. I have a book with photos of some homes in that area. Now, let's see. Here. This is a lovely two-bedroom house in your price range.
모모Marilyn: It's pretty, but I prefer a two-story home.
모모Richard: I do, too. I don't care for a ranch type.
모모Virginia: OK. Oh, this is a wonderful house. I know it well. I sold it to the present owners.
모모Richard: It looks wonderful.
모모Virginia: This is a two-bedroom, two-bath house. It has a full basement, and it is on a half- acre lot. You can probably afford this one.
모모Marilyn: I like this house.
모모Richard: So do I.
모모Virginia: And the price is right. Would you like to go see it?
모모Richard: Yes. We're planning to talk to someone at the bank next week. Perhaps we could see the house this weekend.
모모Virginia: If some one doesn't buy it before then. But let's keep looking. Just to get an idea of some other possibilities.
모모Richard: This is very helpful, Mrs. Martinelli.
모모Virginia: Here. This is a wonderful example of Spanish-style architecture.
모모Richard: Oh, I love the roof tiles on a Spanish-style house.
모모Marilyn: It looks like the houses in Hollywood.
모모Virginia: It's interesting. A house like this in Riverdale costs double the price. Oh my! Here's a real buy. It's a bargain. This house just came on the market.
모모Marilyn: It's quite lovely. Is it a two-bedroom house?
모모Virginia: No. It has three bedrooms and three baths. I know the house. It has a brand new kitchen. And a living room with a twelve-foot ceiling. And there's a two-car garage.
모모Richard: Then why don't we go look at this house, too?
모모Virginia: It's a good investment.
모모Richard: Thank you, Mrs. Martinelli.
모모Marilyn: Thanks so much.
모모Virginia: My pleasure. Give my best to your parents.
모모Virginia: Your father's a wonderful doctor, Richard. He took care of my daughter when she was a child. He's the best pediatrician in Westchester.
모모Richard: Thanks, Mrs. Martinelli, I'll give them your regards.
모모Marilyn: We really appreciate your advice.
모모Virginia: I do think you should go see the houses and talk to the bank. Here. Let me give you some information sheets abo the houses. They're both very good buys.
모모Richard: Well, thanks so much for your help and your time, Mrs. Martinelli. We've got a lot to talk about.
모모Marilyn: Mmm-hmm. Thanks.
모모Act 3.
모모Mr.Riley: How do you do?
모모Richard: Hello.
모모Mr.Riley: I'm Ralph Riley.
모모Richard: I'm Richard Stewart, and this is my wife, Marilyn.
모모Mr.Riley: Pleased to meet you.
모모Marilyn: Likewise, Mr.Riley.
모모MR.Riley: Please, sit down. What can I do for you?
모모Richard: We'd like to discuss a mortgage.
모모Marilyn: For a house.
모모Mr.Riley: Fine. Are you buying a house or are you reinancing your present home?
모모Richard: We're planning to buy a house.
모모Marilyn: And we'd like to find out about a mortgage.
모모Richard: We are customers of the bank. As a matter of fact, my whole Family banks here.
모모Mr.Riley: I have some questions to ask. Do you own your house or do you rent?
모모Richard: Neither. We live with my parents, Dr. and Mrs. Philip Stewart.
모모Mr.Riley: And how old are you?
모모Marilyn: I'm twenty-nine.
모모Richard: I'm thirty.
모모Mr.RIley: And, Mr. Stewat, what is your occupation?
모모RIchard: I'm a freelance photographer.
모모Mr.Riley: And, Mrs. Stewart, are you working?
모모Marilyn: Yes. I'm a designer, and I work in a boutique.
모모Mr.Riley: Did you bring any savings or salary information? Last year's tax forms?
모모Richard: Yes. Here they are.
모모Mr. Riley: OK. What...what kind of house did you have in mind?
모모Richard: We're talking about buying a two-bedroom house in Mount Kisco. Here are the financial details on the house.
모모Mr.Riley: Thank you. Are you prepared to make a ten-percent down payment?
모모Richard: Yes, we are.
모모Mr.Riley: Payments over thirty years?
모모Richard: Yes.
모모Marilyn: Do you think we can get a loan?
모모Mr.Riley: Well, it depends. Do you own any other property? Any stocks or bonds?
모모Richard: No.
모모Mr.Riley: I see. Then you don't have any collateral. Perhaps you could get a guarantor- someone to sign for the loan for you.
모모Richard: Why is that necessary?
모모Mr.Riley: Since you don't have enough income, and you don't already own any property, the bank needs to be sure you can pay the mortgage every month. A guarantor is responsible for the loan if you can't make the payments.
모모Richard: I see. Well, the idea of buying a house is exciting.
모모Marilyn: Thank you, Mr.Riley. We'll read this over carefully.
모모Mr.Riley: Thank you.
모모Richard: Good-bye. Thanks.
모모Mr.Riley: Godd-bye. And hope to see you soon.
모모Richard: I hope so, too.
모모Mr.Riley: Take care.
모모Marilyn: Good-bye.
모모Richard: It all sounded so easy until they mentioned needing collateral or a guarantor.
모모Marilyn: We have no collateral.
모모Richard: And I don't think it's a good idea to ask Dad to sign as a guarantor. I don't feel right about it.
모모Marilyn: I understand your feelings about it, Richard.
모모Ellen: Now, tell me, what's the problem?
모모Marilyn: We can get a loan from the bank if we can put up some collateral.
모모Richard: And we don't own anything to use as collateral.
모모Marilyn: Or someone can sign with us as a guarantor.
모모Ellen: Why don't you speak to Dad?
모모Richard: No. If we buy a house, I want to be able to handle it alone.
모모Ellen: Everybody needs help sometimes, Richard.
모모Marilyn: I understand Richard's feelings about it, Ellen.
모모Richard: In two or three months, I'll have an advance on my book and be able to put more money down.
모모Marilyn: What about the house in Mount Kisco? Somebody else'll buy it by then.
모모Richard: Then there'll be other houses, Marilyn.
모모Ellen: Richard has a point. You're just beginning to look.
모모Marilyn: We're in no great rush. It's true.
모모Richard: This has been a great learning experience for us, Marilyn. Talking to the real-estate agent. Looking at the houses. Talking to the loan officer at the bank.
모모Marilyn: It has been a learning experience. That's true.
모모Ellen: I think you're doing the right thing. Taking your time. Looking around. Especially with a purchase of this kind. You're talking about a lot of money.
모모Marilyn: We'll call Mrs. Martinelli and tell her to keep looking for us.
모모Richard: And I'll call Mr.Riley at the bank and tell him we'll see him in a couple of months.
모모Ellen: And if you ever need Dad or me to help you...
모모Marilyn: We know.
모모Ellen: You know we'll be there for you.
모모Richard: It's a Stewart tradition. We're a family.
모모Episode 12 You're Tops
모모Act 1.
모모Grandpa: Is that you, Susan?
모모Susan: It's me, Grandpa.
모모Grandpa: Am I glad to see you!
모모Susan: And am I glad to see you! I am also glad to be here.
모모Grandpa: How are things?
모모Susan: I have been talking to a group of salesmen since ten this morning, and I'm real exhausted.
모모Grandpa: Well, you look good. What's Harry doing tonight?
모모Susan: He and Michelle are visiting relatives in New Jersey today.
모모Grandpa: The rest of our family went to the movies. So it's just you and me, Susan.
모모Susan: It's nice to be alone with you, Grandpa. We don't get to see enough of each other.
모모Grandpa: Oh, I feel the same way, Susan. I miss seeing you. But to tell the truth, next time I'd like to go into the city and meet you there, instead of you coming here.
모모Susan: You don't need to do that, Grandpa.
모모Grandpa: Yeah, I do. I need to get out more. Well, I mean there's a lot to do around the house, and I love being here with the family, you know, but I'm restless. Since I retired, I've got extra time on my hands.
모모Susan: I understand, Grandpa.
모모Grandpa: I think you do. Frankly, I'd like to use my brain a little more.
모모Susan: Grandpa, you have so much energy and so many years of experience. There are probably a lot of places for you to work. Particularly in the construction field.
모모Grandpa: But at my age, I'm not looking for a full-time job. I'm retired. But I'm bored.
모모Susan: Well, there must be something. Maybe I can help.
모모Grandpa: Let's go into the kitchen, and maybe can help me set the table.
모모Susan: Sounds good to me. What are we having?
모모Grandpa: I prepared lamb chops, mashed potatoes, and a tossed green salad to begin with.
모모Susan: Grandpa, you are a terrific guy!
모모Susan: You're still thinking about something to do, aren't you? A job of some kind.
모모Grandpa: That's right. I've been thinking about it for weeks now .There must be some way to put my mind to good use.
모모Susan: We'll find a solution. A positive solution to your finding a way to use that wonderful mind of yours.
모모Act 2.
모모Susan: Sam, would you come in ,please?
모모Sam: You sound like something's brothering you, Susan. The sketches for the cover of the new doll book?
모모Susan: That's not it. Please sit down.
모모Sam: Sure.
모모Susan: I need your advice on a personal matter, but it's not about me.
모모Sam: You need my advice on a personal matter, and it's not about. OK.
모모Susan: It's about my grandfather.
모모Sam: What's the problem?
모모Susan: It won't sound like a big deal, but it is. I had dinner with him Saturday, and he's very unhappy about not working.
모모Sam: I thought he was retired and pleased to be living with the family.
모모Susan: He is, but there's so much energy and talent in the man ,and he doesn't get to use it.
모모Sam: But what can I do? What kind of advice are you looking for?
모모Susan: Simply this. John Marchetta runs this company.
모모Sam: He founded this company.
모모Susan: Right. John Marchetta Gave me my start here six years ago, when I first graduated from college. He gave me the chance to use my talents and made me feel more confident.
모모Sam: Right. Maybe he can do the same thing for your grandfather.
모모Susan: Or at least give him some advice.
모모Sam: Right. Then I've solved your problem.
모모Susan: I can always depend on you, Sam.
모모Sam: I'm glad to help. Shall I call Mr. Marchetta for you?
모모Susan: No, no. I'll do that. Thanks.
모모Sam: Now, how's the Stewart family?
모모Susan: Fine, thank you, Mr. Marchetta. Except for my grandfather.
모모Sam: What's wrong, Susan? What's wrong with him?
모모Susan: He needs to work. In fact, that is the reason why I'm here to see you. I know you're building a new factory, and I thought...may be...my grandfather is so experienced in the construction trade, he could be so valuable.
모모Sam: Tell him to come and see me at ten 0'clock tomorrow morning. I have an idea that may solve the problem for him and help a lot of other people.
모모Susan: Really, Mr.Marchetta? Can I tell him that?
모모Marchetta: Sure can. Ten 0'clock in the morning. Here.
모모Susan: Oh, thank you!
모모Act 3.
모모Grandpa: Hi. I'm Malcolm Stewart.
모모Marchetta: John Marchetta. Sit down, sit down.
모모Grandpa: Susan has told me a great deal about you.She says you're quite a man.
모모Marchetta: She says a lot of wonderful things about you too, Mr. Stewart.
모모Grandpa: That's always nice to hear, Mr.Marchetta.
모모Marchetta: Call me John. May I call you Malcolm?
모모Marchetta; Let's talk business.
모모Grandpa: That's music to my ears.
모모Marchetta: I understand you used to be in the construction business.
모모Grandpa: Yup. Forty-three years. Here's a brief description of forty three years of on-the-job training.
모모Marchetta: That is some history! You're a valuable asset, Malcolm. Very valuable.
모모Grandpa: Thank you. Yup. Forty-three years. Half that time in my own construction company. Big jobs-factories, shopping malls. That kind of thing.
모모Marchetta: Then you retired.
모모Grandpa: Yes. After my wife died, and I felt I should spend more time with my children and grandchildren. I live in Florida, and they lived in New York.
모모Marchetta: I understand. My daughter Cami lives in NewYork. I like being near her.
모모Grandpa: When I came here, I planned to take a few months off. Relax with the family and then look for some work. Put my experience on the line...but, unfortunately, there isn't any work for a retired person my age.
모모Marchetta: Sometimes there is, and sometimes there isn't. Well, I'm evolved with an organization, and we're trying to resolve that problem.
모모Grandpa: What's that?
모모Marchetta: TOPS. T-O-P-S- means Talented Older People's Society.
모모Grandpa: I'd like to be a member. How much are the dues?
모모Marchetta: There are no dues...The organization serves major men and women like you. Experienced, talented, retired. But our members want to go out there and use their talents. They want to work.
모모Grandpa: That fantastic, John!
모모Marchetta: I've got and idea for you, Malcolm. Just fill out this form for me. It'll only take a few minutes. Sit right here, and do it while I talk to my secretary. When I get back, we'll talk about my new factory. My company is a member of TOPS. So I try hard to find opportunities for people like it. Well, I can use your brainpower on the job right now. Have you got time this morning to go over to the construction site with me? I'd like to have you meet my foreman-get some background on the job.
모모Grandpa: I've got plenty of time.
모모Marchetta: I'll be right back. We'll go over to the job site together.
모모Danny: Malcolm, you worked on the Spaceport project?
모모Grandpa: My company was the contractor. I built the theater there with my own two hands, practically.
모모Danny: I understand.
모모Marchrtta: Well, I'm glad to see you two guys getting along so well because Danny, Malcolm is on the TOPS team. He's going to be working with you for a while. His experience will be valuable to both of us.
모모Danny: Welcome aboard, Malcolm!
모모Marchetta: I'm going back to my office. Give me a call later, Malcolm. I'll tell you the time and date of the next TOPS meeting. I'd like you to meet the group.
모모Grandpa: I will, John. And again-thanks.
모모Marchetta: No...thank you. And thank Susan.
모모Grandpa: He's quite a man.
모모Danny: A real inspiration for me.
모모Grandpa: OK, Danny. I know you didn't expect to have me around, but I think I can be of some help to you.
모모Danny: Let me tell you something, Malcolm. With your background and experience, I can learn something...and I do need some advice on a difficult problem. Let me show you this.
모모Grandpa: I don't want to give you a final opinion without studying these building plans more carefully. But a simple solution might be to move the air-conditioning units instead of redesigning the entire system. It might be simpler and less expensive.
모모Danny: You just earned your weight in gold, Malcolm. Welcome aboard!
모모Grandpa: It all happened so quickly! I can't believe it!
모모Susan: I'm glad Mr. Marchetta was so helpful.
모모Grandpa: He was more than helpful. He actually took me to meet his foreman.
모모Susan: I'm thrilled for you, Grandpa.
모모Grandpa: I don't know how to thank you, Susan. You're a wonderful granddaughter.
모모Susan: It's good to see you so happy.
모모Grandpa: I'll be at the construction site tomorrow. What are you doing tomorrow night?
모모Susan: I'm not doing anything. Why?
모모Grandpa: How about a date with your grandfather? I owe you a good steak dinner.
모모Susan: I'll accept. Tomorrow night. You and me. Dinner. What time?
모모Grandpa: I'll pick you up here at seven. Is that OK?
모모Susan: I can't wait! And you can tell me all about your first full day back on the job.
모모Grandpa: It's a deal!
모모Episode 13 A Real Stewart
모모Act 1.
모모Ellen: There's nothing more joyous than the arrival of a new baby.
모모Susan: I am so excited, Mother! Just imagine-Marilyn and Richard must be thrilled! Oh, a new baby!
모모Ellen: Max...Max...Max. Oh, it's a sweet-sounding name for a sweet little boy. My first grandchild.
모모Susan: And my first nephew. Isn't he just adorable? He looks a lot like you, Mom. He does.
모모Ellen: Do you think so? Well, I guess. He does look a lot like Richard, and I guess he looks a lot like me. Oh, he's got Richard's eyes, though.
모모Susan: I really want Harry and Michelle to see Max.
모모Ellen: When are they coming?
모모Susan: Tomorrow. Harry has an account to work on today. Yes, he does have Richard's eyes. Big blue eyes. The baby even looks at you like Richard does.
모모Ellen: Well, children usually referable their parents.
모모Susan: It's true Michelle is a lot like Harry in so many ways. And she's shy with new people, just like he is.
모모Ellen: You really like Michelle, don't you?
모모Susan: Yes. I'm very fond of her.
모모Ellen: And Harry, too?
모모Susan: Well...
모모Ellen: Uh, it's four-thirty. Oh, my! Marilyn and Richard will be home from the hospital any minute, and we must prepare this room.
모모Susan: Where will we put all the presents?
모모Ellen: Well, let's take everything to the living room. Marilyn and Richard and the baby need the space. It's crowded in here.
모모Grandpa: The welcome sign is up: "Welcome home, Max."
모모Ellen: Isn't it exciting, Grandpa?
모모Susan: Your first great-grandchild.
모모Grandpa: Yes. Yes, sir. A great-grandchild. A great-grandson. Another generation to carry on the Stewart name.
모모Susan: I love you, Grandpa. You make me feel so proud to be part of our family.
모모Grandpa: One day, You'll have your own family, and I'll be proud to be part of it.
모모Ellen: Now you understand my feelings, Susan. I'm Grandpa's daughter-in-law, but I feel like a Stewart. He's always made me feel like his own daughter.
모모Grandpa: Well, that's because you're so much like us-wonderful!
모모Susan: Mom, got it. This will make a nice gift for Marilyn and dates and information about Max's life here. Let's see. Name: Max Stewart. Does he have a middle name?
모모Ellen: No, just Max. I like that. No middle name. No middle initial.
모모Grandpa: Like me. I'm Malcolm Stewart. Just Malcolm Stewart.
모모Susan: And Max has your initials, Grandpa:M.S.
모모Ellen: Uh, it must mean something.
모모Susan: Weight: eight pounds six ounces.
모모Grandpa: Eight-six. Big boy! All the Stewart men were big.
모모Ellen: Well, Robbie was eight pounds two ounces, and Richard was eight pounds three.
모모Susan: And me?
모모Ellen: Eight pounds six. You were big, just like Max.
모모Susan: Eight pounds six, just like me. That's nice. Length. Length?
모모Ellen: Richard says Max is twenty-one inches long.
모모Grandpa: Tall. All the Stewart men are tall.
모모Ellen: Well, Grandpa, you're about five-nine or five-ten. I wouldn't call that tall.
모모Grandpa: I take after my mother's family. They were...they were... they were average.
모모Susan: Mother:Marily.Father:Richard. And lots of pages for Richard's photos of Max.
모모Grandpa: Speaking of mother and of father-and speaking of Max hear the car. They're here!
모모Ellen: Oh! Oh, quickly! Go, go, go!
모모Ellen: Let's see. Oh, welcome home. Oh, let her in. Wait with your pictures for a second. Come on, darlings. Sweetheart... Sit down right here.
모모Susan: Oh, he's so cute! Oh, Marilyn!
모모Robbie: Max looks just like Grandpa.
모모Grandpa: A real Stewart.
모모Marilyn: I'm so happy to be home with my family-and with Max.
모모Act 2.
모모Susan: It's almost ten 0'clock. I've got to go. Tomorrow is Monday, and work begins at eight in the morning for me. Oh, I'm so happy that Max is home. He's the sweetest little thing.
모모Ellen: I'll drive you to Grand Grandpa, Robbie, and I can finish wrapping all these gifts.
모모Richard: It's so good to have you home again...and to see Max asleep in his bassinet at home with us.
모모Marilyn: To be with our family and all that Stewart TLC.
모모Richard: TLC-tender loving care. That's our motto.
모모Marilyn: Did you see the washcloth and the towels with the teddy bears on them? Alexandra and the Molinas sent them for max.
모모Richard: It was so kind of them. Now Max has come into everyone's life.
모모Marilyn: The house is so alive with him here. The welcome sign over the door. The boxes of presents. The M-Z-X over his bassinet. Robbie put that there. Susan's teddy bear. So cuddly. The beautiful crib from Mom and Dad.
모모Richard: Oh, and Grandpa's baseball glove. You know, it hung over my crib, too. And it hung over Robbie's crib.
모모Marilyn: Part of Grandpa's magic?
모모Richard: Oh, that's not all. It hung over Susan's crib.
모모Marilyn: Part of Grandpa's magic?
모모Richard: Oh, that's not all. It hung over Susan's crib.
모모Marilyn: The same baseball glove?
모모Richard: That's right. Grandpa hangs it there for good luck. He says it always brought him good luck on the baseball team. He believes it'll bring good luck to all the Stewart babies.
모모Marilyn: And then he takes it back when Max is ready to use it?
모모Richard: Yes, and replaces it with a new glove so the old one will be ready for a new member of the Stewart family
모모Marilyn: Grandpa really loves his family, doesn't he? So do I.
모모Richard: And so do I.
모모Richard: And so does Max.
모모Marilyn: After he eats!
모모Act 3.
모모Marilyn: Thanks, Michelle.
모모Michelle: I hope you like it.
모모Marilyn: Isn't this baby outfit adorable? With his name on it "Max." Thanks so much, Harry and Michelle.
모모Richard: We really appreciate it.
모모Harry: I'm glad you like it. Michelle Picked it out.
모모Michelle: Yes. I told Daddy to pick blue ones. Blue is for boys, and pink is for girls.
모모Grandpa: And Max is some boy.
모모Richard: He's a real Stewart.
모모Granpa: Right!
모모Ellen: That was so thoughtful of you, Michelle. Especially to pick it out in blue.
모모Susan: Would you like to see baby Max, Michelle?
모모Harry: Could she? Could we?
모모Michelle: Could I?
모모Marilyn: Take them upstairs, Susan. Harry and Michelle can watch Max sleeping.
모모Susan: Let's go.
모모Harry: Come on, Michelle. Before Max wakes up.
모모Marilyn: Will you please take this upstairs, Susan?
모모Susan: Uh-hum.
모모Marilyn: Thank you.
모모Philip: Michelle is very grown up for a ten-year-old, huh?
모모Ellen: She's smart and sensitive for her age.
모모Grandpa: Growing up without a mother is difficult. You mature quickly.
모모Ellen: Susan's like a mother to Michelle. They have a good relationship. Do you think Susan and Harry will get married?
모모Robbie: Yeah. You can count on it.
모모Philip: I think so. Yes. They get along so well.
모모Grandpa: I like him. He's good for Susan.
모모Ellen: He's a little quiet.
모모Richard: It's hard to do anything but listen in this family.
모모Ellen: How can anybody get a word in around here?
모모Marilyn: You're right, Ellen.
모모Philip: Oh, really?
모모Richard: It's the way it should be. The Stewarts are the Stewarts!
모모Grandpa: They always were, and they always will be.
모모Richard: Right!
모모Grandpa: They've always got an opinion. Always got something to say.
모모Marilyn: And now there's Max Stewart, and if he talks as loudly as he cries, we're all in for trouble.
모모Robbie: He's quiet now.
모모Marilyn: Mmm-hmm.That's because he's sleeping.
모모Harry: He's really cute.
모모Susan: It's not necessary to whisper, Harry. A baby gets used to voices.
모모Harry: I remember now. We always whispered when Michelle was born.
모모Michelle: And I didn't sleep well. Daddy told me. I never slept. And when I did, I woke up when I heard someone speak.
모모Susan: I bet you were cute.
모모Harry: She sure was.
모모Michelle: Not as cute as Max. He's like a little doll.
모모Michelle: Oh, good. Now I can help diaper him.
모모Susan: Let's get Marilyn. What do you do when he cries like that?
모모Harry: You pick him up.
모모Susan: He's so little...so new. Let's call Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: Time for a feeding and time for a diapering. You're a real Stewart.
모모Episode 14 Playing Games
모모Act 1.
모모Harry: You like living in New York, don't you?
모모Susan: Oh, I love it. It's so convenient. I can take the bus to work...or the subway...or a taxi. And there's so much to do. Lots of movie houses, and the theater.
모모Harry: I know what you mean. I'd like to live in the city, but living in New Jersey and the suburbs is better for Michelle. Trees, grass.
모모Susan: There's a lot of good things about suburban living. I grew up in Riverdale, Remember? So I know. But, as a working woman, I think New York has all the conveniences-including the best tomatoes.
모모Harry: The truth is, I'd like to live in the city. Michelle's the right age. There are lots of things for her here.
모모Susan: You're right, Harry. Today is the perfect example. Michelle and her friends are at the aquarium in Brooklyn. They come back here for lunch, then go uptown to the Museum of Natural History. There's so much for young people to see and do. It's just incredible!
모모Harry: Not just for young people. What about me? I've never been to the aquarium or Museum of Natural History. Have you?
모모Susan: Oh yes, Harry. My mother and father often took us somewhere in the city on the weekends. Dad was a busy doctor, but he usually managed to squeeze a Sunday in with Richard, Robbie, and me. I used to love to go to the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
모모Harry: I've been there several times. Twice with Michelle.
모모Susan: You ought to think about spending more time with Michelle at all the great places in the city.
모모Harry: Well, perhaps, you'll help me select some of the great places. And perhaps, you'll join us?
모모Susan: Perhaps I will.
모모Susan: Well, there we are .All set for lunch, Harry.
모모Harry: It looks inviting. I wish Michelle and her friends would get here. I'm starving, aren't you?
모모Susan: I can't wait to take a bite of the pumpernickel. It smells so delicious. Coming! Coming! Who is it?
모모Michelle: Michelle. It's us, Susan.
모모Susan: Come in Michelle, and bring your friends along. We're on the fifth floor. Oh you're been here before
모모Harry: Susan, I really appreciate your doing this Michelle and her friends.
모모Susan: Oh, please, Harry. It's nothing. I'm not just doing it for Michelle. I'm doing it for you.
모모Harry: Thank you.
모모Susan: I'm doing it for us, Harry.
모모Harry: Well, it's...it's important for Michelle to see us together more often. That's true.
모모Susan: It's important for Michelle and me to get to know each other better. That's important for us.
모모Harry: That makes me feel good.
모모Susan: What, Harry? What makes you feel good?
모모Harry: Well, that you care about Michelle, that you care about me, and that you care about us.
모모Susan: Well, Harry, that's because I do. I do care.
모모Harry: They'll be here any minute .Susan, I'd like to continue this conversation later.
모모Susan: Of course, Harry. We'll finish the conversation when they go to the museum.
모모Harry: I'd like that.
모모Susan: So would I.
모모Act 2.
모모Michelle: Oh, Daddy! We had such a good time at the aquarium. I saw a real shark. I could almost touch it.
모모Harry: I'm so glad. Hi, Michelle, why don't you introduce everybody to Susan?
모모Michelle: Hi, Susan.
모모Susan: Hi.
모모Michelle: I'd like you to meet Audrey and her mother, Mrs. Cooper.
모모Susan: Hello, Audrey. Nice to meet you, Mrs. Cooper. I'm Susan Stewart.
모모Michelle: And this is Shirley and Nicole.
모모Susan: Hi, girls.
모모Harry: Come on in. Come on in, Mrs. Cooper on in, everybody.
모모Mother: The aquarium was so exciting. I had never been there before. The girls learned a great deal. Frankly, so did I.
모모Susan: Well, please sit down and tell us all about it during lunch.
모모Harry: We prepared some tuna fish and cheese sandwiches for lunch.
모모Michelle: I love tuna fish. Don't you , Audrey?
모모Susan: I remember when I used to b a Girl Scout. My mother would take us everywhere, too.
모모Mother: Susan, I understand you're in the toy business.
모모Susan: Yes, I am. My company manufactures toys and games for children.
모모Harry: Susan's vice-president in charge of new toys and games.
모모Susan: And the marketing of new toys and games.
모모Michelle: Can we test a new game for you, Susan?
모모Susan: That's an excellent idea, Michelle. I happen to have a game which I brought home to study.
모모Michelle: Let us try it ! Don't you want to play? Nicole ? Shirley? Audrey?
모모Susan: We tested it last week on twelve-to fifteen-year-olds, and they found it to be too easy-in other words...boring. We think it might be just right for ten-to twelve-year- olds.
모모Michelle: That's us, Susan.
모모Susan: First, you shuffle the deck and lay them face down. Then you select the leader. I'll be the leader. The leader takes the first ten cards and lays them face up on this stand. h-t-e-r-c-z-e-p-e-s. Everyone gets a turn, going counterclockwise, left to right. You have thirty seconds to make a word, using as many letters as possible. You get one point for each letter, plus the person with the longest word gets ten extra point. The first one to get one hundred points wins.
모모Michelle: That's easy.
모모Susan: OK, let's go around the atble. You first, Audrey.
모모Audrey: Chest-c-h-e-s-t.
모모Susan: Good. That's five points also. It's your turn, Shirley.
모모Shirley: Creep-c-r-e-e-p.
모모Susan: Creep. That's another five-letter word. Five points. So far, you're all tied.
모모Harry: Sheet -s-h-e-e-t-sheet.
모모Susan: Sheet is a five-letter word. Michelle, your turn.
모모Michelle: Cheese-c-h-e-e-s-e.
모모Susan: Terrific! Michelle wins with a six-letter word, plus she gets an additional ten points for a total of sixteen points. How are you enjoying the game so far?
모모Michelle: I think it's too easy.
모모Susan: Too easy?
모모Harry: Michelle!
모모Susan: It's OK, Harry Michelle is quite right. She just said it's too easy.
모모Harry: Well, I like the game.
모모Mother: I enjoyed lunch, Susan. Thank you so much, but we have fo get going to meet the rest of the troop at two 0'clock at the museum.
모모Susan: Oh, it was nice meeting all of you. I hope you have a wonderful time at the Museum of Natural History.
모모Harry: Good-bye, everybody. Have a good time.
모모Girls: Bye.
모모Harry: See you in front of the museum at five 0'clock.
모모Mother: Oh, OK. Thanks, Mr. Bennett. That'll be fine. And thanks again for the lunch and for the game.
모모Michelle: Good-bye, Susan It's not a bad game. It's just... slow.
모모Susan: Just slow. You helped save our company a lot of money. Bye-bye.
모모Harry: You are wonderful with kids.
모모Susan: I am.
모모Harry: Isn't there a conversation that we have to finish?
모모Act 3.
모모Harry: There's a conversation we have to finish.
모모Susan: What was it about?
모모Harry: It was about caring.
모모Susan: Oh?
모모Harry: Yes, caring. I said that it makes me feel good that you care about Michelle.
모모Susan: Well, I do care about Michelle.
모모Harry: And it makes me feel good that you care about me.
모모Susan: You know I do. You're a...wonderful friend.
모모Harry: And it makes me feel good that you care about us.
모모Susan: Well...well, I do, Harry. It's only natural that if I care about Michelle and I care about you, then I care about us.
모모Harry: It's OK, Susan. We had this part of the conversation before Michelle and her friends arrived. Now comes the good part.
모모Susan: Like what?
모모Harry: Well, assume that if you care about Michelle and you care about me and you care abut us, that we can talk about us. I mean-you and me. Isn't that right?
모모Susan: What are you trying to say, Harry?
모모Harry: What I'm trying to say...since this is so easy ...Here are ten letters that express my feelings for you.
모모Susan: Don't be silly, Harry.
모모Harry: You want a hint? It's two words.
모모Susan: You're making the game harder.
모모Harry: Can't you figure it out? Seven letters... two words...that express the feeling that I feel for you in my heart.
모모Susan: Harry, I get it!
모모Harry: Well? Does that mean you'll marry me?
모모Susan: Is that a proposal, or are we just playing a game?
모모Harry: Sit down, Susan. There's something I have to ask you. Susan, will you marry me?
모모Susan: It's such an important decision .There's so many things to talk about. There are three things that have to be done first, Harry.
모모Harry: Three things?
모모Susan: First, we have to decide where to live.
모모Harry: Well, that's easy. We talked about that earlier. We'll live in New York.
모모Susan: All right. Second, we have to talk to Michelle together about being married.
모모Harry: We'll do that immediately. What' the third thing?
모모Susan: You have to ask for my father's permission.
모모Harry: Absolutely! But first things first. We have to go pick up Michelle.
모모Susan: Oh, I'm so happy, Harry!
모모Harry: Not as happy as I am.
모모Episode 15 Second Honeymoon
모모Act 1.
모모Marilyn: What's this for?
모모Richard: Just because. How's the baby?
모모Marilyn: Fast asleep.
모모Richard: I'm sorry I missed him. I had to work late.
모모Marilyn: What are the flowers for, Richard?
모모Richard: Five years of happiness. Happy anniversary.
모모Marilyn: But our anniversary isn't until Saturday.
모모Richard: I couldn't wait. Besides, we are not going to be here Saturday.
모모Marilyn: We're not?
모모Richard; Uh-uh.
모모Marilyn: Where are we going to be?
모모Richard: If you had your choice of all the places in the world, where would you choose to spend our anniversary?
모모Marilyn: The Watermill Inn. I loved that place when we went on our honeymoon.
모모Richard: Perfect! You picked the right place.
모모Marilyn: I don't understand.
모모Richard: You and I, Mrs. Stewart, are going to spend a second honeymoon at the Watermill Inn.
모모Marilyn: Oh, Richard! That's wonderful, bu-
모모Richard: No buts.
모모Marilyn: Absolutely not. The world's greatest grandmother, Mrs. Ellen Stewart, has agreed to take care of him for the weekend.
모모Marilyn: Richard, isn't that too much to ask of your mother?
모모Richard: Too much? She loves taking care of Max.
모모Marilyn: But... I'll miss him.
모모Richard: Well, we'll phone every hour, and you can listen o him over the phone. Come on. Mar. It's time you and I had a romantic weekend alone together. We've earned it. What do you say?
모모Marilyn: It does sound tempting. You're right. We're earned it.
모모Richard: Great! I'll make a reservation right now. Remember that wonderful little balcony where we had our meals...with a view of the Hudson River?
모모Marilyn: How could I forget?
모모Richard: Hello. Is Mrs. Montefiore there? Ah. She's out. Yes. This is Richard Stewart. My wife and I spent our honeymoon at the inn. No, we didn't leave anything in the room. It was five years ago. We'd like to make a reservation for this weekend. Yes, a double room, please. What? Are you sure? But...OK. Nothing available. Wait! Don't hang up! Can you recommend someplace nice-someplace nearby? Uh-hold it. Old country Inn? Right. And the phone number? 555-2420. Thank you. He says there's another inn just half a mile down the road from the Watermill. It won't be the same, But what do you say?
모모Marilyn: Well...
모모Richard: My mom is available to baby-sit this weekend.
모모Marilyn: Well, OK. See if they have a room.
모모Richard: Right!
모모Richard: Hello. Is this the Old Country Inn? Yes. This is Richard Stewart. The desk clerk at the Watermill suggested your inn. Would you happen to have a room for two available this weekend? Something really nice. My wife and I are celebrating our fifth anniversary. Yes. I'll hold. He's checking. You do? Great! What is the daily rate? That's fine. Thank you. Yes, we'll be arriving by car about ten 0'clock Friday night. Stewart. S-t-e-w-a-r-t. Thank you. Done! You and I, Mrs. Stewart, are going to have a wonderful, romantic weekend!
모모Marilyn: Richard, that's the baby.
모모Act 2.
모모Clerk: Right this way, Mr. and Mrs. Stewart. Well, it's small, but clean.
모모Richard: Clean? You call this clean?
모모Clerk: Have a nice stay.
모모Richard: Thank you. I don't believe this. Well, it isn't the Watermill Inn, but let's get a look at the view.
모모Marilyn: How is the view?
모모Richard: Great, if you enjoy looking at a parking lot.
모모Marilyn: Well, maybe we'll see the view in the morning. Right now, we should clean up this room.
모모Richard: Sorry, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: Why should you be sorry?
모모Richard: Well, the rain, the room, the view of the parking lot. It isn't the way I hoped it would be.
모모Marilyn: Stop blaming yourself. After all, we're here, we're alone, we're together. And I l love you. Isn't that enough?
모모Richard: Is is for me, but I wanted this weekend to be special for you.
모모Marilyn: It is special. Happy anniversary.
모모Richard: It's still raining. I want to play tennis.
모모Marilyn: I want some breakfast. Let's call room service and order a mice breakfast, and then we'll figure out what to do today.
모모Richard: Right. Would you give me room service, please? I beg your pardon! Oh, I see. They don't have room service at Old Country Inn.
모모Marilyn: Well, let's go down to the coffee shop.
모모Richard: They don't have a coffee shop .We can get our meals at Mrs. Montefiore's down the road.
모모Marilyn: That's OK, honey. I love walking in the rain.
모모Richard: Oh, you're being a really good sport about this, Marilyn, but I think we should face the truth.
모모Marilyn: What's that?
모모Richard: This is not the way to spend our fifth anniversary.
모모Marilyn: Well, what do you want to do?
모모Richard: Why don't we get in the car and drive home?
모모Marilyn: Oh, Richard, it really isn't that bad.
모모Richard: Do you want to stick it out for the whole weekend?
모모Marilyn: Well, I'll admit the room is uncomfortable.
모모Richard: Uh-hum.
모모Marilyn: And I do feel bad about your mother having to take care of the baby all weekend.
모모Richard: Why don't we just check out?
모모Marilyn: OK.
모모Marilyn: Hello? Yes. Yes, this is she. Oh, hello! How nice of you to remember us! Yes, My husband did call. You do? Really? It won't be any trouble? Oh, yes, I think we'd like that very much. Fifteen minutes! Thank you. Good-bye. You will never guess.
모모Richard: Uh... I give up.
모모Marilyn: Mrs. Montefiore from the Watermill Inn.
모모Richard: What is she calling about?
모모Marilyn: They have an opening. Someone just checked out, and Mrs. Montefiore has reserved the honeymoon suite for us.
모모Richard: You're kidding?
모모Marilyn: No. Isn't it wonderful?
모모Richard: It's fantastic! Oh, Now all it has to do is stop raining. Let's go.
모모Act 3.
모모Innkeeper: Welcome to the Watermill Inn.
모모Marilyn: Oh, Richard, it's exactly as it was when we were married!
모모Innkeeper: And when I got married.
모모Marilyn: Even the old patchwork quilt is the same!
모모Innkeeper: My great-grandmother made that quilt when Teddy Roosevelt was President. In those day, when they made quilts, they cut patches from the old clothing of every member in the family os that each one would be a part of it.
모모Marilyn: What a lovely tradition!
모모Richard: Thank you for calling us.
모모Innkeeper: I remember you and your wife from the first time you stayed with us.
모모Richard: We were very young.
모모Innkeeper: And very much in love.
모모Marilyn: We have a baby now.
모모Innkeeper: How wonderful! A boy or girl?
모모Marilyn: A boy-Max.
모모Innkeeper: Do you have a picture?
모모Richard: Would a professional photographer be without a picture?
모모Innkeeper: Oh, he's adorable!
모모Richard: And very bright.
모모Marilyn: Like his father. A real Stewart.
모모Richard: And very good-looking, like his mother.
모모Innkeeper: Well, it's nice to have you with us again. next time, bring the baby.
모모Marilyn: You see, Richard? Max is welcome here.
모모Richard: Not on our anniversary. This vacation is for you and me.
모모Innkeeper: If there's anything you need, please call me. I'll be in the front office all day.
모모Innkeeper: Oh, I took the liberty of ordering some breakfast for you. Just put it over there, Charles. Thank you, Charles. Compliments of the Watermill Inn.
모모Richard: Thank you.
모모Marilyn: Thank you so much.
모모Richard: Now, this is my idea of a good time. Let's see...Hotcakes and maple syrup, with scrambled eggs.
모모Marilyn: Umm...smell that coffee... cinnamon and cloves.
모모Richard: Homemade buttermilk biscuits.
모모Marilyn: Slices of orange with burnt honey.
모모Richard: Let's eat!
모모Marilyn: First I want to call home and check on your mother and the baby.
모모Richard: Honey, if there were any problems, she would call us.
모모Marilyn: She doesn't know we've changed hotels.
모모Richard: You're right. Of course.
모모Marilyn: Hello, operator. I'd like to call Riverdale, New York.
모모Richard: This food is heavenly, isn't it?
모모Marilyn: This whole place is heavenly. Do you remember that old desk? Mrs. Montefiore told me that George Washington sat at that desk and wrote to his wife Martha.
모모Richard: What do you want to do after breakfast?
모모Marilyn: Why don't we take a walk down to the river?
모모Richard: In the rain?
모모Marilyn: No. Look out the window. The sun is shining!
모모Richard: Now this is my idea fo a good time!
모모Episode 16 Full of Surprise
모모Act 1.
모모Robbie: The mailman just dropped some mail in our box Grandpa.
모모Grandpa: Probably a lot of advertising and bills. Why don't you write to me, Robbie, so I can get some interesting mail?
모모Robbie: You were right, Grandpa. Advertising, bills, bills, advertising.
모모Grandpa: Yes. It's just like I said, Robbie. Nothing interesting.
모모Robbie: You won't believe it, Grandpa, but there's a letter here addressed to you, Mr.Malcolm Stewart, and it looks like a personal letter.
모모Grandpa: Oh, it must be a bill.
모모Robbie: I don't think so. The return name and address is Pete Waers, RFD Number 1, Chesterton.
모모Grandpa: You're joking. Pete Waters?
모모Robbie: Pete Waters, RFD Number 1, Chesterton. You know him?
모모Grandpa: Do I know Pete Waters? You bet I do! He was my roommate in college. He visited with Grandma and me in Florida about five years ago.
모모Robbie: What does he say? Is he OK?
모모Grandpa: Yeah, he's fine. Just fine. He's writing to invite me to spend a weekend with him at his farm. He's planning a get-together with two or three other college friends. The dindof a fifty-year anniversary reunion.
모모Robbie: Sounds like fun. Fifty Years? Wow!
모모Grandpa: It sounds like fun to me, too, Robbie.
모모Robbie: What kind of farm does he have?
모모Grandpa: I've never been three, Robbie, but he has chickens and cows and all. That means fresh eggs and fresh milk.
모모Robbie: Does he have a family?
모모Granpa: No, he doesn't fobbie. He never married. He's not as lucky as I am to have a family and grandchildren . I'm a lucky man.
모모Robbie: How come he never got married?
모모Grandpa: That's a good question, Robbie. A very good question. He never married because the girl he was in love with in college married someone else. As simple as that. He never got over it.
모모Robbie: He must have loved her very much.
모모Grandpa: Yes. Very much. Lillian Winters. She was in our class.
모모Robbie: And what happened?
모모Grandpa: She was in love with Donald McGrath, the quarterback on our football team.
모모Robbie: Football players are always popular with the ladies.
모모Grandpa: She liked Pete, and they went to dances together. But her heart was with Donald.
모모Robbie: Did he ever get over it?
모모Grandpa: No, he never did.
모모Robbie: Where is she today?
모모Grandpa: I don't know. Maybe Lillian will be at the reunion.
모모Robbie: You think so?
모모Grandpa: Pete's full of surprises.
모모Robbie: I wish I could go there with you, Grandpa. What do you think the surprise will be?
모모Grandpa: With Pete, you never know, Robbie.
모모Robbie: Won't it be exciting to see all your college friends there again?
모모Grandpa: It is already. I'm kind of excited about going now. Next weekend...sleep over Friday and Saturday night and come back Sunday. I can't wait!
모모Ribbie: Don't you think you ought to call Pete and tell him you're coming?
모모Grandpa: You're reading my mind, Robbie.
모모Act 2.
모모Attendant: Hello. What can I do for you?
모모Grandpa: Hi. Fill'er up. I need a full tank.
모모Attendant: Check the hood?
모모Grandpa: No, thanks.
모모Attendant: Whereabouts are you headed?
모모Grandpa: Pete Waters's farm, near Chesterton.
모모Attendant: I know it well. Pete Waters' lived around here almost as long as I have.
모모Grandpa: How long is it going to take for me to get there?
모모Attendant: About fifteen minutes. There's a shortcut-is you know it.
모모Grandpa: No, I don't. Could you tell me how to use the shortcut?
모모Attendant: Sure. You take the next left turn. You'll see a stop sign. Make a right at the stop sign. Stay on that road, and you'll cross a blue bridge. Then you'll see a big old red bam. That's the back of Pete Waters's place.
모모Grandpa: That's quite a difference from the directions that Pete sent me.
모모Attendant: Now, if you take that route, it's probably a lot simpler, but it'll take you ten minutes longer.
모모Grandpa: OK. Let me repeat it. I take the next left turn to the stop sign. Then a right across a blue bridge, and then a big red barn.
모모Attendant: Can't miss it.
모모Grandpa: How much do I owe you?
모모Attendant: Well, that'll be eighteen dollars and seventy cent. No charge for the cleanup. It's on the house.
모모Grandpa: Well, here's a twenty.
모모Attendant: Ah. OK. That's a dollar and thirty cents change. Thee we go... will mae twenty. Thanks.
모모Grandpa: Thank you. And thanks for the directions.
모모Grandpa: This must be Peteps barn.Turn right to the house. Hi.
모모Worker: Hi. What can I do for you?
모모Grandpa: Is this the Pete Waters farm?
모모Worker: It is.
모모Grandpa: I'm a friend of Pete's . I'm looking for the house.
모모Worker: It's just over yonder. Keep along this road till you get to the end of the fence. You'll see the chicken. His house is on the left.
모모Grandpa: Well, thanks.
모모Grandpa: "have gone to the railroad station. Back soon with a surprise. Make yourself at home. Have a look around Pete." Same old Pete Waters. Always full of surprises.
모모Act 3.
모모Amold: Don't tell me. Please don't tell me. I recognize you...
모모Peggy: Oh, don't be silly, Arnie. Of course you recognize him. Except for the beard, he hasn't changed in fifty years. It's Malcolm Stewart!
모모Amold: I know it's Malcolm Stewart. You haven't changed much in fifty years.
모모Grandpa: Peggy-Peggy Pendleton! You're Peggy Pendleton!
모모Amold: Who am I, you old rascal? You don't recognize me, do you?
모모Grandpa: I know who you are. You're Amold Franklin! I know who you are!
모모Peggy: You look wonderful, Malcolm!
모모Grandpa: Sit down. Pete isn't home.
모모Amold: Really?
모모Grandpa: No. He left a note on the door saying he was going to the railroad station to pick up a surprise.
모모Peggy: He's so funny. Always full of surprises, even fifty years later.
모모Grandpa: The two of you look unbelievable!
모모Amnold: How's your family? Oh, I was sorry to hear about your wife having passed away.
모모Grandpa: Yes. About four years ago.
모모Peggy: And you're living with your children now? In New York? Pete wrote us and told us.
모모Grandpa: Yup. Retired and moved to New York to live with my son and his family.
모모Peggy: By the way, what do you think this big surprise is?
모모Amold: It could be most anything, knowing Pete.
모모Grandpa: Hey, that must be Pete! Now we'll find out about the surprise.
모모Pete: So good to see you all!
모모Peggy: Oh, pete, Pete! Oh, It's so good to see you!
모모Pete: Remember Lillian?
모모Lillian: I remember all of you. You haven't changed a bit.
모모Peggy: Lillian! Oh, my gosh!
모모Amold: Lillian Winters. We were together in the Thursday night drama society.
모모Lillian: Remember me, Malcolm?
모모Grandpa: Oh, beautiful as ever, Lillian. How's Donald?
모모Lillian: That's OK, Malcolm. Donald Passed away a couple of years ago.
모모Amold: Sorry to hear that, Lillian.
모모Peggy: Oh, I'm so sorry.
모모Amold: I would not have missed this get-together for the world!
모모Grandpa: And your little surprise, Pete? You really surprised me by having us all come together.
모모Pete: You don't know what the surprise is yet? Come on! We'll tell you the big surprise.
모모Pete: I've invited you here for the weekend to help celebrate.
모모Peggy: Celebrate?
모모Grandpa: Our fiftieth reunion?
모모Amold: No.
모모Lillian: No. Pete wants to tell you...
모모Pete: Now, let me have the honor, Lillian.
모모Grandpa: For goodness sake, Pete, tell us! I can't wait much longer.
모모Pete: Well, I am pouring this iced tea so that we can toast Lillian-and me.
모모Peggy: You don't mean to tell me that you and...
모모Pete: Yes, I do. I have loved Lillian all these years, so I asked her to be Mrs.Pete.Waters.
모모Lillian: And I said yes.
모모Grandpa: I knew it! Congratulations!
모모Peggy: Oh, Lillian, I am so happy for you both.
모모Amold: It's wonderful!
모모Pete: It's wonderful for me. Lillian will make me a happy man finally.
모모Grandpa: You are full of surprises, Pete.
모모Pete: We are going to spend the entire weekend having a good time together here on the farm. We are going to celebrate all weekend.
모모Peggy: When is the wedding?
모모Pete: That's another surprise. Lillian and I were married two weeks ago in Detroit. She's come here to stay.
모모Grandpa: Wait till I tell my family about this!
모모Peggy: Why, that's wonderful!
모모Episode 17 Photo Finish
모모Act 1.
모모Marilyn: What are you doing?
모모Richard: I think I've got them.
모모Marilyn: You think you've got what?
모모Richard: Performing arts-performing arts centers. I think I've got them all, but I'm not sure.
모모Marilyn: I think you have got it, Richard. Lincoln Center, home of the Metropolitan Opera, the New York City Ballet, the New York Philharmonic.
모모Richard: Shubert Alley, center of the theater on Broadway.
모모Marilyn: And Comegie Hall. And the others. I do have it all.
모모Marilyn: You have been working on this for some time, Richard. I'm glad you feel you've finally put it all together. What now?
모모Richard: Now for the hard part.
모모Marilyn: Oh, you think you're going to have a hard time getting the album published?
모모Richard: Well, it won't be easy.
모모Marilyn: So, what do you think you're going to do?
모모Richard: Does the name Harvey Carlson ring a bell?
모모Marilyn: Oh,yes! Harvey Carlson! I remember.
모모Richard: He said I should call him. He's the publisher of the Carlson Publishing Company. He said they need a new book of photographs, and he really liked my concept.
모모Marilyn: So, why don't you call him in the morning?
모모Richard: Do you think I have enough to show him?
모모Marilyn: I've been through every section with you, Richard. It's quite complete. And now that you're satisfied, with the performing arts section, I think you should show it to Mr.Carlson.
모모Richard: You're right. My Family Album, U.S.A. feels right. I'll call in the morning and set up an appointment to see him.
모모Marilyn: He's going to love your work. Come on. Let's get some sleep.
모모Richard: Is it too early to call Mr.Carlson?
모모Marilyn: Seven after nine? No. I'm sure he's in his office.
모모Richard: His number is five, five, five, seven, five, three, two. Five, five, five, seven, five three, two. Hello. Mr. Carlson, please.
모모Receptionist: Mr.Carlson is busy at the moment. May I help you?
모모Richard: I'd like to make an appointment with him.
모모Receptionist: And your name is...?
모모Richard: My name is Richard Stewart. He told me to call him about my project, Family Album, U.S.A.
모모Receptionist: Mr. Stewart, I just spoke to Mr.Carlson. He would like to see you. But the only time he's available this week is tomorrow morning at ten 0'clock.
모모Richard: Thanks. Thanks a lot. Good-bye. Well, it's done. Tomorrow morning at a publisher's office.
모모Marilyn: Oh, it's so exciting, isn't it, Richard?
모모Richard: Well, finally a publisher will see my work.
모모Act 2.
모모Receptionist: Good morning.
모모Richard: Good morning. My name is Richard Stewart. I'm here to see Mr.Carlson.
모모Receptionist: Please sit down, Mr. Stewart. Mr. Carlson will be with you shortly.
모모Richard: Thank you.
모모Receptionist: Excuse me, Mr. Carlson, but Richard Stewart is here for his ten 0'clock appointment with you. OK. Thank you. Like I said, he'll be with you shortly.
모모Richard: Thank you.
모모Receptionist: Yes, Mr.Carlson. Yes, sir. He's ready for you, Mr. Stewart.
모모Richard: Thank you. In there?
모모Receptionist: Yes. In there. Good luck.
모모Carlson: Come in, come in. This is a crazy morning. Hello, Richard.
모모Richard: Hello, Mr.Carlson.
모모Carlson: Sit down, sit down.
모모Richard: Thank you for seeing me on such short notice.
모모Carlson: I hope you've brought your pictures along. I see that you have. Let's get right to it. We need a new coffee table book, and a book of photos about the United States still feels right. OK, let's take a look. Good. Very good. Family Album, U.S.A. It's an excellent title. If you had to describe the book in one sentence, how would you do it?
모모Richard: Well, I'd describe it as a book which is a ... a portrait of the United States-the places, the people-mostly the people. The things they do, the ways they live, the placesd they visit, and the landmarks. A photographic journey.
모모Carlson: These are wonderful-these photos in your pen arts section. Carnegie Hall, Lincoln Center.
모모Richard: I'm glad you like them.
모모Carlson: I do, but...
모모Richard: But?
모모Carlson: There's something missing. You've got a good eye, Richard. You're a terrific photographer. But before I can publish your work. I need to meet with my marketing department, and you've got to do one more thing.
모모Richard: What's that, Mr. Carlson?
모모Carlson: In the section on culture, you've included performing arts centers, but you've left out street performance.The mimes. The musicians. The dancers-in the parks and on the streets. Richard, if you go out and photograph street performances in the city, you'll have it.
모모Richard: That is a great ieda.The performing arts centers and the street performances. I'll do it.
모모Carlson: If you do it, I'll publish your work.
모모Richard: Are you serious?
모모Carlson: I've never been more serious. When do you think you can return with street performances?
모모Richard: A couple of weeks.
모모Carlson: If they're as good as the rest of these pictures, it's a deal.
모모Richard: You won't be disappointed, Mr.Carlson. Thanks.
모모Carlson: Good-bye, Richard, and good luck. See you in two weeks.
모모Richard: Good-bye, Mr. Carlson. Thanks. So if you like the street-performance photos, you'll really publish Family Album, U.S.A.?
모모Carlson: When I way something, I mean it. Go to work. Goodbye.
모모Richard: Good-bye.
모모Act 3.
모모Richard: Two weeks. I said I could do it in two weeks, and I did it.
모모Marilyn: The pictures you've taken are fabulous, Richard. Mr. Carlson will love them.
모모Richard: Monday morning. I'm going to show him the photos on Monday morning. I can't wait!
모모Marilyn: I'm very proud of you. You really did a beautiful job. I know he will love the new photographs for your book.
모모Richard: Yeah. I really did do a good job, didn't I? Hey, you know? There's still some film left on this roll, and there's one person I haven't photographed in a long time.
모모Marilyn: Who?
모모Richard: You.
모모Marilyn: Richard! I haven't brushed my hair.
모모Richard: You look great!
모모Marilyn; It's not fait, Richard. I'm not even ready.
모모Richard: Oh, that's wonderful! That's wonderful!
모모Carlson: Wonderful!
모모Richard: Thanks.
모모Carlson: Fabulous!
모모Richard: Thanks!
모모Carlson: Terrific!
모모Richard: Thanks.
모모Carlson: They get better and better.
모모Richard: Thanks a lot.
모모Carlson: This is sensational!
모모Richard: Yeah. Thanks.
모모Carlson: What a job! Good work, Richard!
모모Richard: I'm so glad you like them so much.
모모Carlson: Like them? They represent your best work.
모모Richard: Really?
모모Carlson: Absolutely.
모모Richard: Well...what do you think? Do I have my book?
모모Carlson: You do. You do. There's a book here, I'll have a contract and an advance payment waiting for you first thing in the morning.
모모Richard: Thank you.
모모Carlson: And while you're here I would like to introduce you to your editor. And I want you to meet the people in the art department. I'll set up an appointment with the marketing
모모people.
모모Richard: When do you think we'll be through?
모모Carlson: In about half an hour. Why?
모모Richard: I can't wait to tell Marilyn!
모모Episode 18 Making Difference
모모Act 1.
모모Ellen: I don't believe it!
모모Philip: What's wrong?
모모Ellen: Carter Boswell!
모모Philip: Who's Carter Boswell?
모모Ellen: He's running for the school board. The election's next month.
모모Philip: What's wrong with wanting to be on the school board?
모모Ellen: Nothing. But he wants to cut the school budget!
모모Philip: Maybe it needs cutting.
모모Ellen: Cutting the budget is fine, but he wants to do it by cutting all the cultural programs. No music, no dance, no concert, no stage presentations.
모모Philip: Why does he want to do that?
모모Ellen: He says it's to save the taxpayers' money, and I think he believes that the taxpayers' will vote for him if he spends less on the cultural programs.
모모Philip: He's probably right. Lots of people want their taxes used for new books and a new paint job in the schoolrooms.
모모Ellen: Maybe some of us would like to pay a little bit more and keep the cultural programs for our kids.
모모Philip: Well, I'm not sure, Ellen. I hear it from my patients. Lots of people are tired of higher taxes.
모모Ellen: I know, but if Boswell wins he'll be an important decision maker on the school board, and he doesn't know anything about our children's education.
모모Philip: Who's running against him?
모모Ellen: Nobody. That's the problem.
모모Philip: Well, it sounds to me like Carter Boswell is going to win this seat on the board.
모모Ellen: Oh, not if I can stop him!
모모Philip: And how are you going to stop him?
모모Ellen: I don't know. Maybe I'll run against him.
모모Philip: Well, You've got my vote.
모모Ellen: I'm serious, Philip. Why shouldn't I run?
모모Robbie: Why shouldn't you run for what, Mom?
모모Philip: Your mother is thinking of running for the school board.
모모Robbie: Hey, that's terrific, Mom!
모모Richard: Against Carter Boswell? Great!
모모Ellen: Well, if I run for office, the voters will have a clear choice. I stand for everything Boswell doesn't.
모모Marilyn: I think a lot of people will vote for you against Boswell, Ellen. I'll vote for you.
모모Ellen: Will you help me if I do run?
모모Marilyn: Absolutely.
모모Ellen: The trouble is it takes a little bit of money to run a campaign.
모모Philip: I think you can make a difference, Ellen. And in a short campaign you wouldn't need as much money. You know something, Ellen? Why not give the people of Riverdale a clear choice? I'm with you. You can make a difference.
모모Maxwell: Come in.
모모Ellen: Mr. Maxwell?
모모Maxwell: Yes, Charles Maxwell.
모모Ellen: My name is Ellen Stewart.
모모Maxwell: Hello. Please, sit down. You asked to see me. What would you like to see me about?
모모Ellen: I'd like your help.
모모Maxwell: Well, I'm editor of the most influential newpaper in Riverdale. Actually, it's the only newspaper. A lot of people would like my help. Do you have a story?
모모Ellen: I'm planning to run for the school board.
모모Maxwell: Against Carter Boswell?
모모Ellen: Yes.
모모Maxwell: Well, that is news.
모모Ellen: Will you announce that I'm running?
모모Maxwell: Sure. But I need some information.
모모Ellen: Of course.
모모Maxwell: Why will the voters vote for you against Boswell, Mrs.Stewart?
모모Ellen: Because I care.
모모Maxwell: "Vote for Ellen Stewart.She cares." Not a bad slogan. But what do you care about?
모모Ellen: Well, I care about the children of our town. I don't want hem to grow up without cultural programs in our school.
모모Maxwell: Do you have a plan?
모모Ellen: I want our children to learn more than reading, writing, and airthmetic. I want to keep the after-school programs-the music, the concerts.
모모Maxwell: It's not a bad plan. But who's going to pay for all of this?
모모Ellen: We are. The citizens of Riverdale, of course. I plan to get help from the businessmen and the corporations of Riverdale.
모모Maxwell: That's fair enough. Exactly what do you want from me, Mrs.Stewart?
모모Ellen: You don't know me. I can't expect you to take my side a against Boswell. But I do nee some publicity so that the people of our town know that I'm running for office and that I car about our children.
모모Maxwell: Fair enough. I certainly can print the news. And you are now making news.
모모Act 2.
모모Grandpa: Here are the fliers, hot of the press!
모모Ellen: Looks good. Simple.
모모Marilyn: Right over there, Grandpa. You fold the fliers, Richard and I will put them into the envelopes.
모모Richard: We finished addressing over three hundred envelopes.
모모Grandpa: Need another box?
모모Ellen: Good work, gang.
모모Mike: Hi, this is Mike Johnson. Can I speak with Mr. Or Mrs.Anderson? Thanks.
모모Robbie: Mr.Nelson. Hi. This is Robbie Stewart. Did you know my mother is running for the school board?
모모Jimmy: Yes, Miss Kim, Ellen Stewart. "She cares." Oh, see you at the polls.
모모Robbie: Certainly, I'll give her your best wishes, Mr.Nelson.
모모Mike: Hi, this is Mike Johnson. Can I speak with Mr. or Mrs.Burns? Thank you.
모모Ellen: We have done so much in such a short amount of time. I can't believe it! Wait till Philip come and sees our progress!
모모Robbie: Everyone saw story in the Riverdale newspaper.
모모Ellen: Mr. Maxwell was very kind to print my announcement.
모모Grandpa: It helps enormously. Everybody in riverdale reads his paper.
모모Richard: Your photo in it helped, too.
모모Ellen: Thanks to you, Richard, it's a good picture.
모모Philip: Well, hi, all.
모모Richard&Robbie: Hi, Dad.
모모Ellen: Hello, darling.
모모Philip: May I...may I help?
모모Marilyn: Licking envelopes.
모모Grandpa: I fold the fliers.
모모Richard: We stuff them.
모모Philip: And I lick the envelopes.
모모Robbie: Hey, everybody, Mrs.Greenberg is on the phone. She says Carter Boswell is on the TV right now-doing a commercial.
모모Philip: What channel?
모모Robbie: Five.
모모Philip: Five?
모모Boswell: ...and if you ask what I care about, I'll tell you. I care about the school buildings in need of paint. I care about more lockers for the teachers. I care about new fixtures in the hallways-not music or dancing or entertainment. I care about the practical things. If you do, vote for me, Carter Boswell.
모모Ellen: A lot of people will agree with him.
모모Philip: I told you.
모모Robbie: Too bad kids can't vote. It's our school, but we can't vote.
모모Richard: There are people in favor of the cultural programs, Mom.
모모Marilyn: There are, Ellen. Don't be upset by Boswell's commercial.
모모Philip: You have to go on television, too.
모모Ellen: Boswell's a powerful speaker.
모모Philip: You can be, too. Your ideas are good ones.
모모Ellen: I don't know. I'm not sure I'm up to it.
모모Act 3.
모모Ellen: ...my slogan is "I care". I care about people, not things, Vote for me, Ellen Stewart. I care. How was it?
모모Richard: You were terrific!
모모Ellen: Can I see it?
모모Richard: Sure.
모모Ellen: Hello. My name is Ellen Stewart, and I'm running for the open seat on the school board. My slogan is "I care". What does the word care mean?...I care about people, not things. Vote for me, Ellen Stewart. I care.
모모Philip: I like it, but now what? How can we possibly get it on so Riverdale will see it and hear it?
모모Richard: Leave it to me.
모모Ellen: ...I mean that when I say "I care". I care about people, not things. Vote for me, Ellen Stewart. I care.
모모Marilyn: What happened?
모모Richard: Mom is now on television in every appliance store in Riverdale, except Hamlin's. He's a Boswell voter.
모모Philip: That's a brilliant idea, Richard!
모모Grandpa: You inherited your father's brains.
모모Philip: We got our brains from you, Day.
모모Richard: And guess what? I called channel five. Their TV news is going to cover it. "Housewife campaigns in appliance stores." And I'll bet some magazine will pick up the story, too.
모모Robbie: Mom, you're going to win! I know it!
모모Philip: Hold it, Robbie! Just cool down. I know we're getting some attention now, but in the end the voters will have to decide.
모모Grandpa: You're going to win. Trust me!
모모Reporter: In the hotly contested race for the one seat on the Riverdale School Board, Mrs.Ellen Stewart has taken an early lead.
모모Robbie: She's winning! Mom, you're winning!
모모Reporter: Now returning to other local news...Riverdale High School beat its rival Horace Mann in baseball today...
모모Ellen: It's too soon to know for certain.
모모Philip: You're ahead. That's better than being behind.
모모Reporter: More sports after this.
모모Ellen: It's not over yet. Let's just all calm down, and wait for the final results.
모모Grandpa: Ellen, why don't you go out to the backyard and get some fresh air?
모모Ellen: Thank you, Grandpa. I need some.
모모Ellen: What happened?
모모Philip: You came very close, Ellen.
모모Grandpa: You lost by only a hundred and twenty-one votes.
모모Ellen: I lost.
모모Richard: You tried, Mom.
모모Marilyn: You lost by a very small number of votes.
모모Robbie: Only one hundred and twenty-one votes! I'm sorry, Mom.
모모Ellen: There just wasn't enough time.
모모Philip: Look, you've made a very strong impressing on our community. You'll have another chance next election.
모모Philip: Hello. Oh, yes, yes, Mr.Maxwell.
모모Ellen: Hello Mr.Maxwell.
모모Maxwell: How are you? I just called to tell you that you are very impressive. You lost the election, but you won the attention of the residents of Riverdale, of Boswell, and of me.
모모Ellen: Well, thank you, Mr. Maxwell. I appreciate your kind words. I needed that.
모모Maxwell: I hear Boswell wants to appoint you to a special arts committee. I'm sending over a reporter in the morning to interview you.
모모Ellen: You are?
모모Maxwell: I'm going to do an article on "Ellen Stewart-she cares. "Maybe we'll all care now. Good-bye.
모모Ellen: Thank you-and good-bye.
모모Philip: What was that about?
모모Ellen: You were right, Philip. I did make a difference in town.
모모Robbie: And in this family.
모모Episode 19 I Do
모모Act 1.
모모Harry: It looks wrong.
모모Philip: Hmmm. It is wrong.
모모Richard: Are they always that difficult to make?
모모Philip: The truth is...yes. I'll try again.
모모Robbie: At this rate, the wedding will take place tomorrow.
모모Philip: Not to worry. OK.Here we go.
모모Harry: I'm worried, Philip. What if we can't tie the tie?
모모Richard: If we can't tie the tie, then there can't be a wedding.
모모Robbie: You'd better not make Harry any more nervous than he is. Don't worry.We'll figure a way.
모모Grandpa: How're you doing, fellas?
모모Harry: Not so good, Grandpa. We can't get this bow tie tied. Nobody knows how to do it.Do you?
모모Grandpa: No. I never could, either.
모모Philip: Well, you have your own tuxedo. How do you tie your bow tie?
모모Robbie: Yeah, Grandpa, I've seen you in it. You look great.How do you tie it?
모모Grandpa: I don't.
모모Richard: You don't?
모모Harry: What do you mean?
모모Grandpa: I never could tie one of those...things...bow ties. I have always worn a clip-on bow tie.
모모Harry: A clip-on?
모모Philip: Of course. Now I remember.
모모Grandpa: Yes, it's so easy. All you do is clip it around under your collar.
모모Richard: We all need one of those.
모모Robbie: The tuxedo rental store. Do you think they're open?
모모Philip: Should be. Sunday's their big day.
모모Richard: I'll call and find out.
모모Grandpa: Well, if they're not, I'll lend you mine, Harry. You're the only one who really needs to be wearing a tuxedo, anyway.
모모Harry: Thanks, Grandpa.
모모Philip: I'm the father of the bride. I'm supposed to be worried about my daughter, and here I am with the man that's marrying my daughter-worrying about him.
모모Grandpa: Poor Harry. I know the feeling. Wedding-day litters.
모모Robbie: Are they open?
모모Richard: We're in luck. They're open. And they have lots of clip-on bow ties.
모모Robbie: I'll bicycle down to the village and get them.
모모Harry: You'd better hurry, Robbie.
모모Grandpa: There's lots of time. A little over two hours.
모모Harry: In two hours and fifteen minutes I'll be married to Susan.
모모Philip: And be a true member of the Stewart family.
모모Grandpa: Oh, you're a lucky guy, Harry. Susan is one of the best women you'll ever find. She's just like her grandma.
모모Richard: Now, once you put the ring on Susan's finger, you are one of us, Harry. And don't ever forget it.
모모Harry: Ring? Ring? Oh my! What did I do with the rings? I put them in the pocket of my sports jacket.
모모Richard: No, I think you put them in your tuxedo jacket pocket. Remember?
모모Harry: Right. What did I do with the rings?
모모Philip: Didn't you give them to Richard? He's your best man. I remember. You gave them to Richard.
모모Richard: Oh, yeah. I remember now. You handed them to me. What did I do with them?
모모Harry: I hope they aren't lost.
모모Grandpa: Oh, don't worry, Harry. They have to be here.
모모Richard: I remember. I gave them to Robbie to hold so I wouldn't lose them.
모모Harry: Oh, I forget. What time is it?
모모Grandpa: It's still a little over two hours, Harry. Just relax.
모모Harry: What about the rings?
모모Richard: I'm sure Robbie has them.
모모Harry: No, NO, Robbie doesn't have them. He gave them to me to hold on to them because he didn't want the responsibility of holding them. I put them in my tuxedo-but in the lapel pocket. That's a relief. I was really worried.
모모Richard: I'll hold on to them for you. The best man always keeps the rings.
모모Harry: You're right. You're right. You hold on to them so there won't be problem later.
모모Philip: Well, now, I think we'd better get dressed, fellas.
모모Grandpa: All right!
모모Richard: Robbie will bring the ties back.
모모Harry: Hey, leaving me?
모모Grandpa: You'll be fine.
모모Philip: Try to take it easy. It'll all be over in two hours.
모모Harry: Over?
모모Grandpa: The wedding ceremony will be over. You'll be husband and wife.
모모Harry: I guess you're right. Two hours from now.Two hours from now.
모모Act2.
모모Marilyn: And now for...something old, something new, something borrowed, and something blue.
모모Susan: OK. Let's see. Something borrowed. That's this dress. Borrowed from Marilyn.
모모Ellen: Something blue. My wristband. I wore it when I married your father.
모모Susan: Oh, Mother. I forgot you still had it. It's just so lovely.
모모Ellen: I bought it in an antique shop when I was about eighteen years old. I saved it for my wedding day.
모모Susan: And you saved it for me, didn't you, Mother?
모모Ellen: Yes, honey I did. Are we ever going to finish?
모모Ellen: All right. OK. Something borrowed.
모모Marilyn: The wedding dress. And something blue.
모모Susan: The wristband. Something old?
모모Ellen: Something old. Right. What's old?
모모Susan: Of course! Something old. I had planned to wear them.
모모Ellen: Grandma's pearls! Oh, Grandpa will be so pleased that you're wearing them. I'm sure he misses Grandma on a day like this.
모모Susan: Help me with them, Marilyn. I've never worn them before. I've been saving them for today.
모모Ellen: Saving them for today? Oh, you're a real Stewart! Marilyn: Oh, there you go. Lovely!
모모Ellen: Lovely!
모모Susan: Lovely!
모모Marilyn: Something borrowed, something blue. Something old... and now for something new.
모모Susan: The veil. Oh, it's so beautiful, Marilyn!
모모Ellen: You really are a fabulous designer, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: Doesn't it look jst right on Susan?
모모Ellen: Perfect!
모모Marilyn: And when you both say, "I do," Harry will lift this veil over your head and kiss the bride.
모모Ellen: Oh, I'm so excited!
모모Susan: When you said, "I do, " Marilyn, it suddenly became real.
모모Marilyn: That's all right, Susan. You've got the wedding-day jitters! In less than two hours, you will be Mrs.Harry Bennett.
모모Ellen: Oh, that reminds me. If we don't get dressed, we won't be there to see Susan become Mrs. Harry Bennett.
모모Susan: Before you leave-do I look all right?
모모Ellen: You never looked better.
모모Susan: Mom.
모모Marilyn: She's right. And that's dear little Max. Got to go and feed him.
모모Susan: What am I Supposed to do?
모모Marilyn: Take off the veil, kick off your shoes, and sit down.
모모Ellen: We'll come upstairs and get you in a little while.
모모Marilyn: Richard's going to take some wedding pictures before the ceremony. So just relax.
모모Susan: Are you kidding? Relax?
모모Susan: Susan Stewart...you are about to become Susan Bennett-Mrs. Harry Bennett.
모모Act 3.
모모Judge: Philip...Ellen.
모모Philip: Ah, Judge.
모모Judge: How are you? How are you?
모모Ellen: Hello.
모모Judge: I think it's time for the wedding to begin.
모모Judge: All right, ladies and gentlemen. Please take your places. The wedding ceremony is about to begin.
모모Judge: OK, Jane. Start the music.
모모Judge: Dearly beloved, we are gathered here today to join this man and this woman in holy matrimony. Do either of you have any reason why you should not legally be joined in marriage? Is there anyone present who can show any just cause why these two people should not be legally joined in marriage? Then, Harry Bennett, do you take Susan Stewart to be your lawful, wedded wife?
모모Harry: I do.
모모Judge: And you, Susan Stewart, do you take Harry Bennett to be your lawful, wedded husband?
모모Susan: I do
모모Judge: The rings, please.
모모Richard: I have them, Harry.
모모Judge: By the power vested in me by the laws of the State of New York, I now pronounce you husband and wife. You may kiss the bride now, Harry.
모모Episode 20 Quality Time
모모Act 1.
모모Robbie: Where's Mom?
모모Grandpa: She went to a school-board meeting.
모모Robbie: I don't know how she does it. She sure keeps busy.
모모Grandpa: It's import to her.There are lots of places to go, lots of things to do. She can't sit around and do nothings to do. She can't sit around and do nothing. Philip works late.
모모Robbie: I guess you're right. I wish I had her energy.
모모Philip: Anybody home?
모모Robbie: We're in here, Dad.
모모Philip: Oh. Hi, gang.
모모Grandpa: Hello, Philip. How was your day?
모모Philip: My day was just fine. So was my night. It's almost ten 0'clock. Mmm.I'm starving. Um...where's Mom?
모모Robbie: She went to a school-board meeting.
모모Grandpa: There's a note for you on the refrigerator.
모모Philip: Oh?
모모Philip: Did you have dinner, Robbie?
모모Robbie: Yeah. Mike and I had a hamburger at the diner. I came home a little while ago. You've been working late almost every night this week, Dad. Aren't you exhausted?
모모Philip: I don't have time to be exhausted.
모모Robbie: You and Mom haven't had dinner together with us in almost a full week.
모모Philip: Yeah, I feel bad about us not having dinner with the family, but our schedules are so different. Either I'm at the hospital doing paperwork, or Mom is at a committee meeting. I frankly don't know what to do about it.
모모Robbie: I'm worried about you and Mom. You really have been working too hard.
모모Philip: Well, I think I've had enough of that sandwich.
모모Robbie: You didn't finish it.
모모Philip: It's not good to eat before going to bed. A cookie can't hurt, though.
모모Philip: Well, I'm heading off for bed and a good night's sleep.
모모Robbie: Well, good night.
모모Philip: Good night, son. Good night, Dad. I'm going to bed.
모모Grandpa: Good night, Philip.
모모Philip: Haven't you finished balancing that checkbook?
모모Grandpa: I found another mistake. I'll be off to bed myself in a minute.
모모Philip: OK.Good night.
모모Robbie: I'm really concerned about them, Grandpa.
모모Grandpa: Concerned about whom?
모모Robbie: About Mom and Dad. They hardly ever see each other. Dad often works late, and Mom has all these committees she's on.
모모Grandpa: What do you propose to do about it? You have that look in your eye.
모모Robbie: I don't know, but there must be a way of getting them to spend more time together. Quality time.
모모Act 2.
모모Ellen: Hello there, Robbie. What are you doing up this late?
모모Robbie: Reading.
모모Ellen: Reading? At this hour? Ah, come on, Robbie. What are you doing up this late?
모모Robbie: Things on my mind.
모모Ellen: Do you care to talk about them?
모모Robbie: Sure, if you don't mind listening.
모모Ellen: Robbie, Robbie, remember me? I'm your mother. If you have something you want to talk about, I'm always prepared to listen.
모모Robbie: You haven't been around much lately.
모모Ellen: So that's it. OK, let's talk.
모모Robbie: You and Dad are like ships that pass in the night. Dad works hard, and he works late. You work hard on all your committees, and you work late.
모모Ellen: I thought you were proud of the work I do.
모모Robbie: I am, Mom. Real proud. You are one fantastic mom, but...but I've been noticing how little quality time you spend with Dad and me... and the family.
모모Ellen: It's a real problem, Robbie. I know it.
모모Robbie: I'm concerned. There must be a way that Day and you can spend more time together.
모모Ellen: Well, we always talk about taking a vacation together with the family.
모모Robbie: I think you ought to take a vacation away from the family-alone. Kind of a second honeymoon.
모모Ellen: It would be wonderful, but our schedules won't allow it.
모모Robbie: I think I have an idea.
모모Ellen: You do?
모모Robbie: Yup. I think I have an idea that will bring Dad and you together in a more scheduled way.
모모Ellen: What is it?
모모Robbie: Well, you know how Dad is always talking about the kids in the ward and how important it is for them to be paid attention to?
모모Ellen: Yes.
모모Robbie: Well...and how hard it i because the doctors and murses are so busy?
모모Ellen: Yes.
모모Robbie: Well, how would it be if you took some time to work with Dad towards solving that problem?
모모Ellen: I don't get it.
모모Robbie: Like setting up a regular weekly reading program. You and Dad. You and Dr.Philip Stewart-going to the children's ward once or twice a week and reading to them.
모모Ellen: Not bad. Not a bad idea, Robbie. As a matter of fact, it fits right in with something I'm working on right now with the school-board committee.
모모Robbie: What's that?
모모Ellen: I've been trying to work out a program in the public school that will bring parents and teachers together once a week to read to the students-their own children, really. By doing that, it will encourage reading.
모모Robbie: So it might fit in with a program for reading to the kids in the hospital.
모모Ellen: You're right. We'll do it! I'm going to talk to Daddy about it right now.
모모Robbie: But Dad was so exhausted when he came home from work. Why don't you talk to him about it tomorrow?
모모Ellen: You are a very smart young man, Robbie. I think I'll wait until tomorrow.
모모Robbie: You won't forget, will you?
모모Ellen: Believe me, I won't. It is a great idea, and I promise you I won't forget.
모모Robbie: Thanks, Mom.
모모Ellen: Thank you, Robbie.
모모Act 3.
모모Ellen: Good morning. What a wonderful morning! Don't the flowers smell wonderful?
모모Philip: Good morning, Ellen. Yes, they do. That's why I'm reading my paper and having my coffee on the patio this morning. Ah, it does smell sweet. How was your school- board meeting last night? You must've come home very late.
모모Ellen: Did you find the sandwich I made for you?
모모Philip: Thanks, dear. I was so tired I didn't even finish it.
모모Ellen: Philip, I've been working on this special project with the school board, and I'd like your opinion about it.
모모Philip: What is it?Ellen: I've been trying to find a way to encourage reading.
모모Philip: Good luck!
모모Ellen: Well, I think I may have found a way to do it.
모모Philip: Tell me about it. I work with families every day, Ellen. I see how people spend their leisure time-young and old.
모모Ellen: Mostly watching television. Well, that would be OK if , and I repeat, if people took the time to read.
모모Philip: I couldn't agree with you more.
모모Ellen: The question is, how do we get them to read more?
모모Philip: I think you're going to give me the answer to tha question. You have that looking your eye.
모모Ellen: I do have an answer, Philip. Or at least I think I do.
모모Philip: Well, tell me about it.
모모Ellen: The plan is a simple one. Involve the entire family in a reading project.
모모Philip: In the home?
모모Ellen: Yes, in the home. But first in the school-rooms.
모모Philip: Hmm, interesting. But how do you plan to do that?
모모Ellen: By arranging with the public schools to schedule one hour a week-to start with. During that time parents are invited to attend-and to read along with the children- their children.
모모Philip: It can go beyond the school system, Ellen.
모모Ellen: Really?
모모Philip: I guarantee you it would go very in the hospitals. My patients-mostly kids-would love to read and be read to.
모모Ellen: You think so?
모모Philip: I know so.
모모Ellen: May be we can experiment with your patients and see how the plan works.
모모Philip: I love the idea. Would you work with me?
모모Ellen: I would love to, Philip.
모모Philip: And that way, we'll spend more time together, Ellen. We just don't see each other anymore.
모모Ellen: You and I are very busy these days. This is true. We need to find time to be together more, to do things together more-you and I. This would be a wonderful way to accomplish that.
모모Philip: I have a question.
모모Ellen: Yes?
모모Philip: What do we read?
모모Ellen: To the patients in the ward?
모모Philip: Yes.
모모Ellen: Well, let you and I talk about it. What would you like to read to them?
모모Philip: Mrs. Stewart and I will read a poem by Robert Frost.
모모Ellen: It's called "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening."
모모Philip: Would you begin, Ellen?
모모Ellen: All right. "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening"by Robert Frost.
모모Whose woods these are I think I know.
모모His house is in the village though;
모모He will not see me stopping here
모모To watch his woods fill up with snow.
모모Philip: My little horse must think it queer.
모모To stop without a farmhouse near
모모Between the woods and frozen lake.
모모The darkest evening of the year.
모모Ellen: He gives his harness bells a shake
모모To ask if there is some mistake.
모모The only other sound's the sweep
모모Of easy wind and downy flake.
모모Ellen&Philip: The woods are lovely, dark and deep,
모모But I have promises to keep,
모모And miles to go before I sleep,
모모And miles to go before I sleep.
모모Grandpa: You two belong on stage! That was wonderful!
모모Ellen: Grandpa!
모모Philip: Dad...Robbie. When did you come?
모모Grandpa: We've been listening to you both. These are lucky kids.
모모Robbie: Do you enjoy reading together?
모모Philip: Well, we may read together aloud at home.
모모Grandpa: You were right, Robbie.
모모Robbie: I know.
모모Episode 21 A Big Fish in a Little Pond
모모Act 1.
모모Michelle: I really like this one Susan. Do you?
모모Susan: Turn around, Michelle. Let me see the back of it. I like it a lot. It fits well. It doesn't need any alterations. We must've bought the right size.
모모Harry: I like the color. She looks good in blue.
모모Michelle: I like blue, too, Daddy.
모모Susan: Try on the skirt and blouse outfit, Michelle-the one that Daddy wanted you to wear.
모모Michelle: OK.
모모Harry: Michelle has been a different kid since we've been married. She's never been happier.
모모Susan: And I've never been happier, Harry. I love her very much.She's been a joy.
모모Harry: We're very lucky, the three of us...and becoming part of the Stewart family, too.
모모Susan: We couldn't ask for anything more, could we?
모모Harry: Well...
모모Susan: Well...? Could we ask for anything more?
모모Harry: Well...we...
모모Michelle: How do you like it, Daddy?
모모Harry: It's my favorite outfit.
모모Susan: It's good for every day. It will be good for school, Michelle.
모모Michelle: I like it, too. I always like skirts that go like this. Do you want to see the winter jacket on me, Susan?
모모Susan: Yes, I do. Change back into your jeans, and put on the new winter jacket we bought today.
모모Michelle: OK.
모모Susan: What did you mean by"well...?" You had something on your mind when I said we couldn't ask for anything more.
모모Michelle: Is everything all right?
모모Harry: Everything is fine, Michelle.
모모Susan: Let's take a look at the winter jacket. Come on over here, Honey.
모모Michelle: It's kind of warm.
모모Susan: It is. That's why we bought it for you. This will be a perfect jacket for the wintertime when it's very cold out. But it's kind of small also. We must've bought the wrong
모모size.
모모Harry: Looks like we should've bought a bigger one. I guess we'll have to exchange it, too. I'm sure the store has others.
모모Michelle: I look silly! It is too small!
모모Susan: You're growing so fast, Michelle.
모모Michelle: Can I take it off? I'm hot!
모모Susan: Sure. Put it back in your room, and we'll hang everything up later.
모모Susan: Well, are you going to tell me what's on you mind, Harry?
모모Harry: I have been offered a job with a major accounting company in Los Angeles. I have been offered a job with a major accounting company in Los Angeles.
모모Susan: Los Angeles? That's a big decision.
모모Harry: I know. It will also affect you and your job, if we decide to go.
모모Susan: Wow! It sure will. But first tell me about the job, Harry. If it's a good one, then we'll make it work for us.
모모Harry: I have a client in the garment business, on Seventh Avenue. I do his taxes every year. He has a big sales office in Los Angeles, and the company in Los Angeles that does his major accounting work is looking for an executive. And he recommended me.
모모Susan: That's wonderful, Harry.
모모Harry: Yes, but it would mean that we'd have to move to L.A.
모모Susan: What about the salary?
모모Harry: The real discussion comes tomorrow. Susan, I don't plan to make any decisons until I have a chance to talk with you about it.
모모Susan: I understand, Harry.
모모Harry: And I don't have to make a quick decision. They know that I'm married and that I have a family.
모모Susan: Well, there's a lot think about. If it's a good job, then I've got to do some thinking about my career opportunities in Los Angeles.
모모Michelle: Is everything OK?
모모Susan: Yes, honey.
모모Act 2.
모모Grandpa: Hello. Hello there. Are you ready for lunch with your grandpa?
모모Susan: Oh! Hi, Grandpa. Yes, of course, I am, but my mind isn't.
모모Grandpa: What's the matter, Susan?
모모Susan: A real dilemma.
모모Grandpa: Does it have anything to do with you and Harry?
모모Susan: Yes, but I don't know where to start.
모모Grandpa: Maybe I can help. Tell me what it is, Susan.
모모Susan: Thanks, Grandpa. Please sit down, Oh! Harry has been offered a job in Los Angeles.
모모Grandpa: Well, this something to think about.
모모Susan: There are so many things to consider. There's Michelle. I wonder if a move would be a bad thing for her. And my job. I don't know if I can get a good job in Los Angeles. And what about our family?
모모Grandpa: Can I tell you what I think?
모모Susan: Tell me.
모모Grandpa: I think that you're very successful and that you have a fantastic reputation in the toy industry. I think you could talk to Mr. Marchetta, and I think he could help you find a real good job in Los Angeles. He was very helpful to me, remember?
모모Susan: I suppose I could call him. But I'm not so sure that I want to leave New York, you, and the rest of our family.
모모Grandpa: Well, I'm not going to kid you, Susan. You know we'd all miss you. But this should be your decision. It's something that only you and Harry can work out.
모모Susan: If moving to L.A.is in Harry's best interest, I have to do what I can do to support him.
모모Grandpa: In every marriage, sacrifices have to be made by one partner from time to time.
모모Susan: And what about Michelle?
모모Grandpa: Well, What do you think?
모모Susan: I think Michelle is better off staying where she is.
모모Grandpa: What does she think?
모모Susan: I don't know for sure.
모모Grandpa: Well, you'll have to ask her.
모모Susan: I think I'm going to have a talk with Mr. Marchetta and get his feelings about my leaving. And about helping me find a job in Los Angeles.
모모Grandpa: Good idea.
모모Susan: I'll call him right now. No point in delaying. Thanks.Grandpa.
모모Bill: Harry, it's the perfect job for you. You'll love it.
모모Harry: It's a big decision for me, Bill. And I have to discuss it with my wife. I don't know if it's right for her.
모모BIll: She'll love it. It's a once-in-a-lifetime offer, Harry.
모모Harry: OK. Tell it to me again.
모모BIll: The company is Craft and Craft, the biggest accounting company in the country.
모모Harry: I know the company well. It's big.
모모Bill: The biggest.
모모Harry: Yeah, yeah. The biggest. When do I have to let you know?
모모Bill: Talk it over. Think it over. Let me know by the end of the week.
모모Harry: When would we have to move?
모모Bill: As soon as possible.
모모Harry: I also have my daughter to consider. I don't want to interrupt her school year.
모모Bill: Let me know by the end of the week. It's a great opportunity for you, Harry. Believe me.
모모Harry: I know.
모모BIll: Craft and Craft is the biggest in the country.
모모Harry: Yeah, I know. The biggest.
모모Susan: I think Michelle is asleep now. Let's talk.
모모Harry: I met with Bill York today.
모모Susan: And I talked with Mr. Marchetta. Did York make the offer?
모모Harry: Yup. He asked me if I want the job.
모모Susan: That's exciting, Harry. What was it?
모모Harry: A vice-presidency with the biggest accounting company in th country-Craft and Craft.
모모Susan: Aren't you excited about that?
모모Harry: Sure I am. But there's so much more to consider.
모모Susan: I talked to Mr. Marchtta.
모모Harry: What did he say? Did you tell him about me?
모모Susan: Of course, Harry. I want what's best for you, and I think I can get a good job through Mr. Marchetta inoios Amgeles also.
모모Harry: You're kidding.
모모Susan: No, I'm not kidding. I talked with him, and he understands completely. He has a major toy buyer in Los Angeles, and he's pretty sure that I can get a good job there.
모모Harry: Unbelievable!
모모Susan: But I think we should talk to Michelle about all of this.
모모Harry: You're right. We'll talk to her about it.
모모Susan: And how do you feel about taking the job in Los Angeles?
모모Harry: How should I feel? It's the biggest company in the country.
모모Susan: Well, then you feel good about taking it?
모모Harry: Well... I feel fine about it. Why shouldn't I?
모모Act 3.
모모Michelle: I love my school. I have so many good friends there now. I wouldn't miss a day even if I were really sick.
모모Susan: Come and sit down for a minute, Michelle. I'd like to talk to you about something. Something important.
모모Michelle: What's wrong, Susan?
모모Susan: Oh, there's nothing wrong, Michelle. But your dady and I are talking about something that I'd like your opinion about.
모모Michelle: I know. I heard you talking about it the other night when I was trying on my new clothes. It's about moving to Los Angeles.
모모Susan: You're right. How do you feel about it?
모모Michelle: Well, I really wouldn't want to move, but...
모모Susan: But?
모모Michelle: But if you and Daddy wanted to, I guess you know what's best for the family and for me.
모모Susan: That's very considerate of you, Michelle. But what about your friends?
모모Michelle: I'd miss them a lot, but I know what it feels like to miss someone.
모모Susan: Honey, we don't have to move if you're no going to be happy about it.
모모Michelle: Does Daddy want to move?
모모Susan: I think so. He's going to tell us tonight about the job offer.
모모Harry: Well, how was everybody's day today?
모모Susan: Michelle was chosen to do the school poster for the play this year.
모모Harry: Congratulations, Michelle! That's something! And how was your day, Susan?
모모Susan: I see you're in a good mood. Why don't you tell us about your day.
모모Harry: I met with Bill York.
모모Susan: It's OK to talk about it, Harry. Michelle knows all about it.
모모Harry: Really?
모모Susan: Really, Harry. Michelle and I have all kinds of feelings about leaving New York, the family, and friends. But is you think you should take the job, we're behind you.
모모Harry: What about Michelle's school?
모모Susan: We'll move after the school term.
모모Harry: What about her new friends?
모모Michelle: I'll make new friends wherever we are as lon as we're together.
모모Susan: We're a family, Harry. Whatever you think is right for you is right for us.
모모Harry: I am so touched. The two of you are really something.
모모Michelle: We love you, Daddy.
모모Harry: And I love you.
모모Susan: OK. Now, tell us about your talk with Mr. York. Did you take the job?
모모Harry: Nope.
모모Michelle: What?
모모Susan: No? You didn't take it?
모모Harry: No, I did not take the job.
모모Michelle: But, Daddy, I thought...
모모Susan: Harry, you didn't turn it down because of me...
모모Michelle: Or me?
모모Harry: No, no. I turned it down because of me.
모모Susan: How's that?
모모Harry: Well, I began to think about you and about Michelle, and then I asked myself, do I really want to work for the biggest company in the country?
모모Susan: And?
모모Harry: And I don't. I went into business for myself because I like being my own boss. I run my own company. I'm a big fish in a little pond. I'm not really sure I want to be a little fish in a big pond.
모모Michelle: Oh, Daddy, does that mean we don't have to move?
모모Harry: That's right, sweetheart.
모모Susan: Are you sure?
모모Harry: I couldn't be more sure, Susan.
모모Susan: I'm glad if you are, Harry.
모모Harry: And besides, how could I live in Los Angeles when all my favorite people live here?
모모Susan: Your favorite people?
모모Michelle: Who's that?
모모Harry: The Stewart family, of course.
모모Episode 22 Career Choices
모모Act 1.
모모Marilyn: "Rock-a-bye, baby, on the tree top, When the wind blows. The cradle will rock. When the bough breaks, The cradle will fall, And down will come baby, Cradle and all."
모모Richard: Hi, Marilyn. What are you doing?
모모Marilyn: Just sketching. I've been thinking a lot about our responsibilities in the past few weeks.
모모Richard: I never stop thinking about them.
모모Marilyn: I've been wrestling with question of whether I go back to work or not.
모모Richard: I see.
모모Marilyn: And I'm torn. I really want to go back to work, use my talents, and pursue my career in fashion design like we as a fulltime mother, especially when he's a baby.
모모Richard: I really understand, Marilyn, But you never have to worry about Max. There's Mother and Grandpa...and I can always arrange my photo schedule around your schedule, if that will help.
모모Marilyn: It's not the same, Richard.
모모Richard: Have you discussed going back to work with your boss?
모모Marilyn: Rita Mae called yesterday.
모모Richard: Ah! That's what's got you thinking, isn't it?
모모Marilyn: She wants to know when I think I'll be returning to the boutique.
모모Richard: And you said...?
모모Marilyn: I said I'd give her an answer in a few days...that I wasn't sure.
모모Richard: I'm sure Rita Mae will understand and wait until you're ready to go back to work.
모모Marilyn: Well, maybe she will, and maybe she won't. Who knows? If I don't accept her offer, maybe she'll find someone else in the meantime, and when I'm ready to go back, there won't be a job for me.
모모Richard: That's something to consider. You've got yourself to think about, too.
모모Marilyn: But I am thinking about myself. Don't you see?
모모Richard: What do you mean?
모모Marilyn: It's not just the job. It's also my career as Max's mother. That's the way I look at it. I have two career opportunities at the same time. My career as a fashion Designer and my career as a mother.
모모Richard: I never really thought about being a mother as a career. I guess you do have two career opportunities and a decision to make.
모모Marilyn: I hear Max.
모모Richard: I'll go to him.
모모Marilyn: No, that's OK. I'll do it.
모모Act 2.
모모Ellen: There's your teddy bear, Max.
모모Ellen: He just loves that teddy bear that Grandpa Philip bought for him.
모모Marilyn: I took him to Philip's office yesterday for a checkup. You should have seen the look on his face when Molly gave him the injection.
모모Ellen: Oh, did he cry?
모모Marilyn: No, My dear little boy just looked up at me as if to say, "Mama, what are they doing to me? Help!"
모모Ellen: How did you feel? Tell the truth didn't you feel terrible?
모모Marilyn: I sure did. I held him closely. I kissed the top of his dear little head. He looked up at me. He tried to smile. Being with him helped.
모모Ellen: Helped him? Or helped you?
모모Marilyn: Being a mother is not easy, if that's what you mean.
모모Ellen: Speaking of being a mother, I've been meaning to ask you what you were thinking about regarding going back to work. I know Rita Mae called. I can imagine what is going through your head.
모모Marilyn: I'm sure you can, Ellen.
모모Ellen: There are so many things to consider. One thing that makes it easier for you is that you have us. Max will always have a family member to watch over him while you're at work. I didn't have that when Richard and Susan were born.
모모Marilyn: What did you do?
모모Ellen: I chose to continue with my career as a music teacher. We hired a woman to watch Richard and then Susan, and I continued with my career.
모모Marilyn: Do you think you made the right decision?
모모Ellen: I think I did. But when Robbie was born, I decided to give fulltime attention to raising Robbie. I felt differently at that time.
모모Marilyn: And you gave up your career as a music teacher?
모모Ellen: Not exactly. I continued to teach piano lessons at home.
모모Marilyn: How did you feel about being away when Susan and Richard were babies?
모모Ellen: I think I did the right thing for them and for myself and for Philip. We needed the money. Remember?
모모Marilyn: Well, we do too, Ellen. Everything I earn helps us towards getting that house we want and need.
모모Susan: I can't wait till he's just a little older. Our toy company makes the most wonderful toys for kids.
모모Marilyn: Max thanks you. I thank you. And Ricard thanks you. Now may I please say hello?
모모Susan: Hello. Hello. I miss Max and think about him all week long. We talk about him at dinnertime.
모모Ellen: Will you please try to relax? I've never seen you so wound up.
모모Marilyn: You seem to be enjoying the pressure.
모모Susan: The truth is, I am. My job is not an easy one, but I really enjoy it.
모모Marilyn: That is exactly what I wanted to talk to you about, Susan.
모모Susan: What's the problem?
모모Ellen: Marilyn's career.
모모Marilyn: Well, my choice of careers.
모모Susan: Choice?
모모Marilyn: My career as a fashion designer versus my career as a mother.
모모Susan: Why does it have to be one or the other?
모모Ellen: That's what I said.
모모Marilyn: How's that?
모모Susan: Why can't you do both?
모모Ellen: She's right.
모모Marilyn: Both?
모모Susan: Well, that's what I do. I have a job, and I have Michelle. I take care of both to the best of my ability. It's not easy, but what is?
모모Ellen: And that's what I did. I did both with Richard and Susan, and I did both with Robbie.
모모Marilyn: I thought you stayed home with Robbie?
모모Ellen: I did. But I was lucky enough to have a career as a music teacher which I could continue at home.
모모Susan: Why can't you work at home, Marilyn? You're very talented. Designing dresses is a career you could establish out of your home, couldn't you?
모모Marilyn: I don't know why I didn't think of it. It seems so simple now.for a year or two I could stay at home with Max and do my dress designs.
모모Ellen: And you could make your dresses at home.
모모Susan: Sounds like a great way to solve the problem.
모모Ellen: That could solve your problem, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: I'm going to call rita Mae at home and ask her come by and talk about it. She want to see Max, anyway.
모모Susan: I think that really answers your questions, Marilyn. You can do it.Do your designs at home-here.
모모Marilyn: And let Rita Mae do the selling at the boutique.
모모Ellen: And you can both benefit financially.
모모Marilyn: I'm going to call Rita Mae right now. Oh, Susan, thank you so much for coming all this way form the city to talk to me about it. I hope you don't mind having taken so much time away from your busy schedule.
모모Susan: Are you kidding? I don't mind at all. As a matter of fact, I came to spend some time with my favorite nephew.
모모Ellen: I think you should call Rita Mae right now. I think your idea of working at home is perfect.
모모Marilyn: I don't know what I would do without you. I'm lucky to have you all.
모모Ellen: We are lucky to have you, Marilyn.
모모Susan: And so is Max.
모모Act 3.
모모Ellen: Hi, big guy.
모모Marilyn: That must be Rita Mae.
모모Ellen: She sure got here quickly. That's a good sign. She must like you and your work, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: I think she's just anxious to see Max. She loves children.
모모Rita Mae: Hi, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: Welcome. It's so nice of you to come.
모모Rita Mae: Oh, I just wanted to see your baby, Max.
모모Ellen: Hello, Rita Mae.
모모Rita Mae: I haven't seen you since the hospital.
모모Ellen: I'm Ellen Stewart, Marilyn's mother-in-law.
모모Rita Mae: We met at the hospital. Hello. How are you?
모모Ellen: I remember. How are you?
모모Rita Mae: Oh, and there is Max! Oh! My, how he's grown! A little present for Max.
모모Marilyn: Oh, it's beautiful, Rita Mae! You shouldn't have.
모모Rita Mae: It's nothing. It's just a little present for Max.
모모Ellen: Can I get you some coffee or tea a cold drink, Rita Mae?
모모Rita Mae: Oh, nothing, thank you.
모모Ellen: Well, I will leave you two to talk. Come on, you big guy. Yes, come on. That's it.
모모Eleln: It's nice seeing you. Let me know if you need anything.
모모Rita Mae: Thanks, Ellen.
모모Marilyn: Thanks, Ellen.
모모Rita Mae: OK, Marilyn. You sounded like you've made a decision when you called me. I'm all ears.
모모Marilyn: I have made a decision, Rita Mae. I've decided to stay at home and be a full-time mother.
모모Rita Mae: I'm disappointed, but I respect your decision. If I had a child as cute as Max, I might do the same thing.
모모Marilyn: But I haven't finished telling you the other half of my decision.
모모Rita Mae: The other half?
모모Marilyn: Yes. I think I can stay at home and take care of Max and continue my career.
모모Rita Mae: Sounds interesting. Let me hear it.
모모Marilyn: Do you remember our talks about custom-designed dresses for the boutique?
모모Rita Mae: I sure do.
모모Marilyn: Why can't I design dresses for you here at home? And make them here. Have the fittings here, too.
모모Rita Mae: And I could do the selling and the pricing at the boutique.
모모Marilyn: Exactly.
모모Rita Mae: Oh! What kind of dresses would you design?
모모Marilyn: I've thought about that for some time.
모모Rita Mae: Yes?
모모Marilyn: Wedding dresses.
모모Rita Mae: Wedding dresses? Brilliant idea! There's a big market today in wedding dresses.
모모Marilyn: That's what I thought.
모모Rita Mae: I like the idea very much. And if it's successful, we can expand to all kinds dresses.
모모Marilyn: That's what I thought.
모모Rita Mae: As a matter of fact, I have a customer for your first wedding dress. My niece is getting married, and I've been trying to find just the right thing for her. Marilyn, you're going to design my niece's dress. That'll be our first one, and then we'll use it to sell others.
모모Marilyn: Do you really mean it?
모모Rita Mae: I really mean it. It's a simple idea, and it will work. You can certainly design dresses. I know that. And there's no reason why you can't do it from your home.
모모Marilyn: I'm so excited! I can't wait to tell Richard!
모모Rita Mae: If I had a baby like Max, I'd want to stay home and be near him all the time, too. You're making the right decision for Max and for yourself too, Marilyn.
모모Marilyn: It all sounds so easy.
모모Rita Mae: Now the hard work begins.
모모Marilyn: Would you like to see some of my designs that I've been working on?
모모Rita Mae: I'd love to . Ooh! Oh, that's wonderful! Ooh...
모모Episode 23 The Community Center
모모Act 1.
모모Robbie: Morning, Grandpa. Is something the matter, Grandpa?
모모Grandpa: The editorial in this paper has my friend Nat Baker real upset. Ah! I'll read it to you. "The old library building on Chestnut Street, which has been vacant for over a year now, was supposed to be made into a community center to serve the senior citizens as well as the younger people of Riverdale. Due to lack of funds for the repainting of the interior of the building and for the furniture needed, the plans for the community center have been postponed indefinitely." He's coming over to talk about it.
모모Robbie: Is it tat serious a problem, Grandpa?
모모Grandpa: It is. Nat's not as lucky as I am, Robbie. He doesn't have any family with him. He lives alone and depends on places like a community center to be with people- people hi own age.
모모Robbie: But there's the old community center on Elm Street.
모모Grandpa: It's small, and the problem is that it's set up primarily for kids to play. Ping-Pong tables, soda machines, and lots of music. It's too noisy for some older people like Nat.
모모Robbie: I never realized that.
모모Grandpa: It's hard for some older people to take all that noise. That's why the new community center is a good idea. Part of the building for older people, part of the building for younger people.
모모Robbie: I see what you mean.
모모Grandpa: That must be Nat.
모모Robbie: It could be Alexandra. She's coming over this morning to help me with my math.
모모Alexandra: Hi, Robbie.
모모Robbie: Hi, Alexandra. Come on in. Do you want something cold to drink?
모모Axexandra: I'd love some cola, please.
모모Robbie: Cola coming up. I really appreciate you coming over to help with my math. My final exam is next Tuesday.
모모Alexandra: You're so good in all your other subjects. I just can't understand why you have so many problems with math.
모모Grandpa: Hi, Alexandra.
모모Alexandra: Hi, Mr. Stewart.
모모Grandpa: I thought that was Nat Baker who rang the front doorbell. Don't let me interrupt you.
모모Robbie: No problem, Grandpa. We're just having some cola before getting to tough stuff- math.
모모Alexandra: He'll do anything to avoid getting down to math lessons, Mr. Stewart.
모모Grandpa: I was the same way.
모모Robbie: Really, Grandpa?
모모Grandpa: Really. I didn't like math, I wasn't good at it, and I didn't like studying it.
모모Robbie: But you had to be good at math. You graduated from engineering school.
모모Grandpa: I was. But not in high school. For some reason, I couldn't get a handle on it. Then, in college. I became good at it.
모모Alexandra: Then there's hope for Robbie.
모모Robbie: I can't wait. You think I can just skip it now and get to it at college?
모모Alexandra: You'll never get to college to find out, Robbie, if you skip it now.
모모Grandpa: That must be Nat.
모모Alexandra: Sit down, Robbie. Let's get to work.
모모Grandpa: I'd like you to meet my friend Nat Baker. This is Alexandra Pappas, and this is my grandson Robbie, whom I think you've met once twice before.
모모Alexandra: Nice to meet you, Mr. Baker.
모모Robbie: Hi, Mr.Baker. We met before.
모모Nat: Where?
모모Robbie: In town. At the hardware store.
모모Nat: I remember now. Right. Hi. Hello, Alexandra.
모모Grandpa: Don't let us keep you from your math tutoring. Robbie. I know you want to get to it.
모모Robbie: Stay...stay.
모모Alexandra: I told you. He'll use any excuse to avoid math.
모모Nat: Did you read the story in the paper, Malcolm?
모모Grandpa: I did.
모모Nat: It's a serious matter for a lot of us. A serious matter.
모모Grandpa: It is. Come on out to the patio. We'll talk about it out there.
모모Nat: Thanks. Nice to meet you...again.
모모Alexandra: What's the problem?
모모Robbie: Come on? You'll hear about it.
모모Act 2.
모모Nat: There is a way, Malcolm. We get our friends to roll their sleeves up and get to work.
모모Grandpa: It's certainly a good idea. If I could take a look at the place, I could probably tell what it requires to fix it up. How much paint, how many hours of work...
모모Nat: That's what I came to ask you to do, Malcolm.If you would supervise the refurbishing, I'll find the people to help do it.
모모Robbie: I'll help too, Mr.Baker. I can get some of my friends to go around the neighborhood and collect the furniture we need.
모모Alexandra: I'll help.
모모Grandpa: Tomorrow. Yes. We'll meet tomorrow morning, right here.
모모Robbie: Can we help?
모모Alexandra: I'd really like to.
모모Grandpa: Sure.
모모Nat: We might need you to come through with your friends, Robbie. Not just to go around the neighborhood asking for furniture, but to help with the paint job. That's backbreaking work and may be too much for us.
모모Robbie: I'll do it. I'll talk to them.
모모Alexandra: And tomorrow morning we'll all meet here to discuss the plan?
모모Grandpa: Come in, come in. Please, come in.
모모Nat: I'd like you to meet my friend Malcolm Stewart. Malcolm, this Joanne Thompson
모모Grandpa: Hello, Joanne. Nice to meet you.
모모Joanne: My pleasure, Malcolm.
모모Nat: And this is Abe Lucas. You must remember Abe. He ran the drugstore and used to play drums with the jazz band on weekends.
모모Grandpa: Oh, sure I do. Hi, Abe.
모모Abe: Hello, Mr. Stewart.
모모Grandpa: Malcolm, please.
모모Abe: Hello, Malcolm.
모모Grandpa: Sit down, sit down. Have some coffee. And I've got some delicious Danish pastry for you.
모모Nat: Where's your grandson Robbie and his friend Alexandra? Weren't they going to be here this morning?
모모Grandpa: I thought so, too. I'm surprised they're not here. Robbie left early this morning to meet Alexandra. Frankly, I thought they'd be here, but...
모모Nat: It's OK. I'm sure they meant well, but they probably had other things on their minds.
모모Joanne: I understand you used to be in the construction business, Malcolm.
모모Grandpa: I was, indeed.
모모Joanne: I wonder if you would take a look at the old library and make sure that it is in good condition so that we don't have to worry about any structural problems.
모모Grandpa: When can I do that? I'd be happy to.
모모Abe: We've got permission to go inside the old building during the week-Tuesday or Wednesday.
모모Grandpa: That's fine with me. I can do it either day.
모모Joanne: That would be very helpful.
모모Nat: I think the building just needs a good cleaning.
모모Abe: And a good paint job.
모모Joanne: Then we have to furnish it.
모모Grandpa: I wish Robbie and Alexandra had come to this meeting. They had some ideas about getting the place fixed up.
모모Joanne: Perhaps they'll show up. In the meantime, let me give you some additional thoughts and ideas I have.
모모Grandpa: OK.
모모Nat: Go ahead, Janne.
모모Janne: As I said, mostly the building just needs a good cleaning.
모모Nat: This place can be developed with one real intergenerational program.
모모Grandpa: That's an idea I like. A community center with the kinds of programs that fit everyone.
모모Nat: And programs that don't leave anyone out.
모모Joanne: It's asking a lot. But we can't do it without talking to the young people. Finding out what they want.
모모Grandpa: If only Robbie and Alexandra were here.
모모Nat: Don't be upset, Malcolm. We'll have a chance to talk to them later.
모모Grandpa: It's not like Robbie. If he says he's going to be here, he's here. I wonder what the problem is.
모모Act 3.
모모Robbie: Hi, everyone. Sorry I'm late. But Alexandra and I have been busy at work this morning on the community-center project.And we brought someone along who can help. You remember Charles Maxwell, Grandpa? He's the editor of the Riverdale paper. He wrote some nice articles on Mom when she was running for the school board.
모모Grandpa: Yes, I remember. You were a great help.
모모Maxwell: Hi, Mr. Stewart. Hope to be a bigger help on the new community-center project. From what Robbie and Alexandra have told me, you people are making one big story.
모모Grandpa: Let me introduce you, Mr. Maxwell. This is Nat Baker, who's responsible for this meeting, and this is Joanne Thompson-and Abe Lucas, who used to run the drugstore in town.
모모Maxwell: Robbie and Alexandra told me what you need to fix up the old library. I am planning to write an editorial that I think will help you.
모모Grandpa: Let's go. What are your questions?
모모Maxwell: OK. Now, I have...first...a couple of questions here. Have you talked to the community council? And have you had an engineer come in to do an inspection?
모모Maxwell: OK, what do you need most of all?
모모Grandpa: People power. Men and women, young and old, to give us their time.
모모Maxwell: To do what?
모모Joanne: To help scrub the building interior clean.
모모Nat: So that we can repaint it.
모모Maxwell: And you also need bodies to do repainting?
모모Grandpa: That's right. And we'll also need some ladders and some brushes and some paint.
모모Maxwell: When do you need the volunteers, and where do they report?
모모Grandpa: I've got the council to agree to open the building for us on the next four weekends.
모모Maxwell: How about furnishings? Are there any special requirements that I should list in the paper?
모모Joanne: Yes. Here is a copy of all the things we need to start with.
모모Maxwell: Let's see. Four desks. Eight straight-back chairs. Thirty folding chairs. Six table lamps. Three end tables .One piano. This is a good start. These items shouldn't be difficult to come by once I print the article in the paper. This community has always been very generous.
모모Grandpa: I agree, Mr. Maxwell.
모모Maxwell: What you're saying is, in order for this center to succeed, we need to put together volunteers from the various generations of future users.
모모Grandpa: That's right.
모모Nat: And without their energy and stamina, there's no way we can complete this project.
모모Maxwell: I've got it. Now give m some information about how you see the building being used.
모모Joanne: Oh, here. On the ground floor we have the reception area...
모모Grandpa: It's here, Robbie. Charles Maxwell lived up to his word. "At the Stewart family home on Linden street yesterday, a group of caring Riverdale citizens gathered to plan the refurbishing of the old library to transform it into a new community center. The original plan by the council was tabled because of lack for funds.The new plan needs you . You could call it a community unity plan. It needs your time, and it needs your energy. And it needs your contributions of furniture, paint, brushes, ladders, lamps, et cetera. A list of these items and a volunteer form can be picked up at the Riverdale Press offices. By working together, this community can do anything to benefit its citizens, and we know you will all work together towards refurbishing the old library and making it a new community center. Charles Maxwell, Editor."
모모Episode 24 Parting Friends
모모Act 1.
모모Robbie: Hi, Mom.
모모Ellen: Hi, Robbie You're home from school early.
모모Robbie: Yeah, they're getting the assembly hall ready for the graduation ceremony, so we all got to go home early. Too noisy to study.
모모Ellen: Well, now that you're here, you can help me with dinner. I need those potatoes peeled and sliced.
모모Robbie: Mom, give me a break Alexandra's coming over to help me study for my math final.
모모Ellen: Well, in that case, you can wash the dishes and clean up after dinner.
모모Robbie: Can I invite Alexandra to stay for dinner?
모모Ellen: Of course.
모모Robbie: Thanks, Mom.
모모Ellen: You an Alexandra have become good friends, haven't you?
모모Robbie: Yes. I like her.She's a terrific person. I'm going to miss her when she goes back to Greece.
모모Ellen: Would you like to give her a little farewell party?
모모Robbie: Mom, that would be terrific! Maybe we could make it a surprise.
모모Ellen: Oh, I don't know. Surprise parties don't always work out.
모모Robbie: Well, we could tell her it's a graduation party for me. When Alexandra arrives, we'll surprise her.
모모Ellen: Well, I suppose that might work.
모모Robbie: I'd like to give her a nice going-away present.
모모Ellen: Fine.
모모Robbie: There's only one problem.
모모Ellen: What's that?
모모Robbie: I'm broke. I should have saved some money.
모모Ellen: I'm sure Alexandra would be happy with something simple, Robbie.
모모Robbie: I know. But, well, I'd like to give her something nice to remember me by. Maybe I could borrow some money from you and Dad.
모모Ellen: It's all right with me if it's all right with your dad.
모모Robbie: Thanks, Mom. I'll talk to him. Is he still in his office?
모모Ellen: I think so.
모모Robbie: Thanks, Mom.
모모Ellen: Robbie! Good luck!
모모Molly: Here are the X-rays you wanted , Dr. Stewart.
모모Philip: Oh. Thank you, Molly. Now, let me check them.
모모Molly: What do you think?
모모Philip: I don't see any breaks or fractures. Well, well. Thank you, Molly.
모모Molly: Thank you.
모모Philip: Come in! Hi, Son.
모모Robbie: Hi, Dad. Am I interrupting you?
모모Philip: No, no, no, no,. What's up?
모모Robbie: Can we talk?
모모Philip: Sure.
모모Robbie: I need some help.
모모Philip: Well, that's what fathers are for.
모모Robbie: Well, before I go to college, I have the whole summer...
모모Philip: Yes...
모모Robbie: And I'm planning to get a job for the summer.
모모Philip: And What sort of job?
모모Robbie: I applied for a job as a lifeguard at the community pool.
모모Philip: Sounds pretty good.
모모Robbie: Yes. I'll be earning pretty good money if I get it. But right now, I'm kind of short of cash.
모모Philip: Who isn't?
모모Robbie: And my friend Alexandra is going to Greece...
모모Philip: Nice girl. We'll all miss her.
모모Robbie: Mom says we can her a going-away surprise party.
모모Philip: Good idea.
모모Robbie: And I'd like to get her a nice gift...
모모Philip: What'd you have in mind?
모모Robbie: Well, a wristwatch, so she'll think of me when she looks at the time. Nothing flashy or expensive. Something simple-but a good one.
모모Philip: Sounds fine, Robbie.
모모Robbie: Well, I saw a nice watch. But I'll need a loan. If you could lend me the money, I could pay you back out of my lifeguard salary.
모모Philip: Well, I guess your mother and I can manage it. When do you need the money?
모모Robbie: Would tomorrow be OK?
모모Philip: You've got it.
모모Robbie: Thanks, Dad.
모모Philip: My pleasure, Son. Oh, and, Robbie...
모모Robbie: Yes?
모모Philip: You'll probably want the family car so you can drive her home after the party.
모모Robbie: Could I?
모모Philip: If you drive carefully.
모모Robbie: I will. Thanks, Dad.
모모Philip: My pleasure.
모모Robbie: You're OK, Dad.
모모Philip: You're not so bad yourself, Son.
모모Act 2.
모모Alexandra: You ready for the next problem?
모모Robbie: You know what? I can't look at another number. How about a lemonade break?
모모Alexandra: Sure.
모모Robbie: Oh, by he way, when is your plane reservation for your flight to Athens?
모모Alexandra: Sunday. Why?
모모Robbie: Would you be able to come over Saturday night?
모모Alexandra: Yes. I should be finished packing by then.
모모Robbie: My folks are giving me a little graduation party.
모모Alexandra: Terrific!
모모Robbie: I'll pick you up.
모모Alexandra: That isn't necessary.
모모Robbie: My dad's letting me borow the car.
모모Alexandra: Oh, well, that would be very nice.
모모Robbie: About eight 0'clock?
모모Alexandra: Eight 0'clock is fine.
모모Robbie: Great! It's a date.
모모Alexandra: Who's going to be there?
모모Robbie: Just my friend Mike and a few kids from school.
모모Alexandra: I'm going to miss all of you. You've been like a second family to me.
모모Robbie: We're going to miss you.
모모Alexandra: Maybe you could come to visit me in Greece?
모모Robbie: I'm counting on it.
모모Alexandra: Wonderful! Are you excited about graduating from high school?
모모Robbie: Sure...and a little scared.
모모Alexandra: Scared? Why?
모모Robbie: Aren't you a little scared?
모모Alexandra: I was when I first came to the United States. I'd never been away from home, and I didn't know what it would be like. But then I found out that people are the same everywhere once you get to know them.
모모Robbie: I'm glad I got to know you.
모모Alexandra: Thatnk you. I'm glad I got to know You-and your family.
모모Robbie: Wouldn't it be nice if we could skip the examinations and get right to the graduation party?
모모Alexandra: It would be very nice. But that isn't the way it works. So...back to work.
모모Alexandra: Good night, Robbie. Good night, Mrs.Stewart. Thank you for dinner.
모모Ellen: Good night, Alexandra.Will you be all right?
모모Alexandra: Yes.The Molinas are waiting for me.
모모Robbie: Good night, Alexandra. I'll pick you up on Saturday night, OK?
모모Alexandra: Yes. Eight 0'clock.
모모Alexandra: I have to run.
모모Allen: Good night, Robbie. She's really a good friend, isn't she?
모모Robbie: Yeah.
모모Ellen: You are going to miss her.
모모Robbie: Am I going to miss her?
모모Ellen: That's what I said! You are going to miss her!
모모Robbie: I'm going to miss her, and my math teacher's going to miss her.
모모Ellen: Well, you can write to her.
모모Robbie: It's not the same.
모모Mike: How does that look, Rob?
모모Robbie: Great! Pass me the hammer.
모모Mike: You got it!
모모Sandra: You're sure Alexandra's going to be surprised?
모모Robbie: Absolutely. She has no idea that the party is in her honor.
모모Mike: Millie, did you bring the papes for dancing?
모모Millie: They're in my bag.
모모Mike: What did you bring?
모모Millie: Some rock 'n' roll.
모모Robbie: Perfect! Alexandra will love it! I can't wait to see her face when she walks in here tonight.
모모Mike: What about the cake?
모모Robbie: My mom's decorating it right now.
모모Ellen: Robbie, there's a phone call for you. It's Alexandra. She sounds upset.
모모Robbie: OK. Thanks, Mom. I'll take it in there. Hi, Alexandra. What? You what? Oh no!
모모Act 3.
모모Millie: How about some music?
모모Sandra: No, let's wait till Robbie gets back from the airport.
모모Millie: Did she say why she had to leave today?
모모Mike: She told Robbie that her flight tomorrow was canceled, so she had to take an earlier flight today.
모모Millie: This is terrible.
모모Mike: Well, that must be him.
모모Sandra: Why is he blowing his horn like that?
모모Mike: I don't know. Maybe he's angry.
모모Sandra: Do you think we should take down the decorations? They'll just make him sad.
모모Mike: Too late now. We should have done it sooner. Oh, here he comes.
모모Mike: Hi, How'd it go?
모모Robbie: OK, I guess. Especially when Alexandra gave me a surprise...
모모Mike: Yeah? What was it?
모모Robbie: This!
모모Mike: Alexandra!
모모Sandra: Hi! What happened?
모모Alexandra: I called my parents from the airport. When I told them my friends were giving me a party, they insisted that I stay. So now I'm taking a flight on Monday instead.
모모Mike: That's great! Terrific!
모모Sandra: But how did you know the party was for you?
모모Alexandra: Well, Robbie told me when he gave me this.
모모Sandra: Oh, it's so pretty!
모모Alexandra: It's lovely, Robbie.
모모Millie: All right! Now we can really start the party!
모모Alexandra: No. Would you mind? I'd like to say something first.
모모Philip: Hear, hear!
모모Alexandra: I should just like to thank all of you, my friends, who have made my stay in the Unite States so wonderful. And to Robbie and the Stwart family for opening their home to me.
모모Robbie: We should thank you. You're a real friend!
모모Alexandra: And I also have a little surprise for you, Robbie. A little going-away present.
모모Robbie: Thank you.
모모Alexandra: Open it, please. I think you might be amused.
모모Robbie: OK. I can't believe it!
모모Alexandra: I guess we were thinking the same thought.
모모Robbie: You had it engraved!
모모Ellen: Read it, Robbie.
모모Robbie: "In friendship, always. Alexandra." I knew we thought alike, but this is too much! Thank you.
모모Mike: All right! Let's have some music!
모모Robbie: Miss Pappas?
모모Alexandra: Mr.Stewart...
모모Philip: Mrs. Stewart, may I have this dance?
모모Ellen: My pleasure, Doctor.
모모Episode 25 Country Music
모모Act 1.
모모Richard: Hot dogs. I love hot dogs. There is nothing better than a hot dog in the country.
모모Ellen: Hot dogs and mustard.
모모Richard: Cooked outdoors over an open fire. I wish I had one now.
모모Ellen: Do you remember when Daddy and I used to take you and Susan and Robbie to Jones Beach?
모모Richard: Oh, I sure do.
모모Ellen: We'd wait until dark and make a fire, and we'd cook the hot dogs. Oh, don't forget the mustard. And, oh, does anybody want ketchup?
모모Richard: I might as well take it along. And now to make sure we've got the hamburger patties. I have to remember to put them in the bag tomorrow morning before we leave.
모모Ellen: I'll remind you, Richard.
모모Richard: Mom, we really appreciate your taking care of Max for the weekend and giving up your free time.
모모Ellen: I love doing it. Susan and Harry have a sitter for Michelle in the city, and I'm taking care of Max. It's no big deal. I am happy to do it for you.
모모Richard: I guess Max is asleep by now. He's not crying anymore.
모모Ellen: Oh, poor baby. He's teething.
모모Marilyn: Well, he's asleep-finally. I feel so bad for him. It hurts so much when a baby gets his first teeth.
모모Ellen: He'll be fine, Marilyn.
모모Richard: Well, he wakes up several times during the night, and the pain is so bad.
모모Marilyn: I'm really concerned about going away for the weekend, Ellen, and leaving you with the full responsibility of taking care of Max. Especially with his teething. I wish he felt better.
모모Ellen: Please don't worry, Marilyn. Remember your father-in-law's a pediatrician. We have a live-in doctor if there's a problem I can't handle.
모모Richard: I agree, Marilyn. We really don't have to be overly concerned.
모모Richard: I'll go upstairs and stay with him until he falls asleep again.
모모Marilyn: Thanks, Richard. Try putting him across your lap on his stomach. He likes that.
모모Richard: I"ll try it.
모모Ellen: When are Susan and Harry Picking you up, Marilyn?
모모Marilyn: They're coming by at six tomorrow morning, so we can get an early start.
모모Ellen: That's nice. And you'll have a full day in the country.
모모Marilyn: And a full night. Tomorrow night we'll be camping out in tents.
모모Ellen: And coming home on Sunday?
모모Marilyn: We'll be heading back late in the afternoon.
모모Ellen: You're going to have the time of your lives. Camping out is such great fun.
모모Marilyn: We'll have a great time camping out, I'm sure. But I'm still a little worried about you, Ellen.
모모Ellen: It will be my great pleasure, Marilyn. Remember, it's only one night.
모모Richard: He's asleep. I think he'll sleep through the night now.
모모Marilyn: Thanks, honey. I hope he's good when we're away.
모모Richard: Well, so do I. Now, to check the list of things we need for the camping trip. We need to bring a flashlight.
모모Ellen: It's in the right-hand drawer, next to the bottle openers.
모모Richard: Do we have a bottle opener on the list, Marilyn?
모모Marilyn: No.No bottle opener. Is that one of the things Susan and Harry are bringing?
모모Richard: No. And we're bring the ketchup, mustard, relish-all that stuff. And cooking utensils. Well, here's the bottle poener, and here's the flashlight.
모모Ellen: Matches.
모모Marilyn: Matches?
모모Richard: Yes, of course. For when we build our campfire. I can't build a fire by rubbing two pieces of wood together.
모모Marilyn: And don't forget your camera and film, Richard.
모모Richard: All packed and ready.
모모Marilyn: And let's not forget our cassette player and some tapes. Some music tapes and some blank tapes so that we can record our thoughts about the trip.
모모Ellen: Oh, that's a nice idea. An audio diary.
모모Marilyn: That's what I thought.
모모Richard: Got it! The cassette player and the tapes.
모모Act 2.
모모Susan: Oh, I love it! To be away from the city on such a beautiful day is my idea of heaven! The grass. The trees. The fresh air.
모모Harry: I told you you'd like it. I've been doing this for years.
모모Richard: You have the spirit of a teenager, Susan. Wait till you see yourself jumping around.
모모Marilyn: That's what I love about Susan. She works hard. She plays hard. She's a real Stewart.
모모Harry: Come on, Richard. Help me get this stuff out of the car.
모모Richard: Where does it go?
모모Harry: Well, we'll put everything over there. We'll set up our tents over there by the edge of the woods. Then we'll be able to make our fire there where it's safe.
모모Richard: Oh, there's our table and benches. All set for eating.
모모Harry: That's what makes this spot so good.
모모Marilyn: Is anybody hungry?
모모Susan: I am.
모모Harry: We just got here.
모모Susan: When you're out in the fresh air like this, it makes you hungry. Aren't you hungry, Marilyn?
모모Marilyn: I sure am. How about you, Richard?
모모Richard: Starving.
모모Harry: You guys are like three kids.
모모Richard: Aren't you hungry, Harry?
모모Harry: Well, yeah. Now that you mention it, I guess I am. I mean, how could a guy not be hungry with all this talk about eating?
모모Marilyn: Where's the bag with the chicken salad sandwiches?
모모Harry: Right here, next to the ice packs. Here. Put the tablecloth on the picnic table, and I will bring the cola and the plastic cups.
모모Harry: Well, how do you like it so far?
모모Richard: I've never been more relaxed.
모모Marilyn: Me, Neither.
모모Susan: I wish we had brought Michelle, Harry. She would have loved it.
모모Marilyn: Oh, You're right. I wish we had brought Max.
모모Richard: Marilyn, Susan, let's not begin to worry about Michelle and Max. We're having a good time, and they're in good hands.
모모Harry: Richard is right. Are you having a good time, Susan? You haven't answered my question.
모모Susan: I am having a good time, Harry. I promise not to think about the city. We're in the country. Let's all just enjoy this wonderful place and this wonderful weather.
모모Harry: Good.
모모Susan: This is heaven, Harry! It was such a great idea to spend the weekend this way.
모모Harry: Thanks, Susan. I thought you'd all like it.
모모Susan: Like it? I love it! Listen to the sounds of the summer that surround us. It's so calming.
모모Harry: I've always liked camping out. Away from the telephones and account books. It's refreshing for me. I always go back to the city in a wonderful state of mind.
모모Susan: We've only been here for a day, and I've completely forgotten about all my business problems. The office seems so far away.
모모Harry: I'm glad you like it, Susan. We'll spend many more weekends like this.
모모Susan: And next time we'll bring Michelle, I wish she were here with us to enjoy the country.
모모Harry: And next time we'll bring Michelle.
모모Marilyn: Just listen to the sound. It's so soothing.
모모Richard: I can hardly keep my eyes open. If only we could bottle the fresh air.
모모Marilyn: Wouldn't it be wonderful?
모모Richard: We could call it "Deep Sleep Country Air."
모모Marilyn: It puts you to sleep. So does the sound. I've bee having a hard time keeping my eyes open just listening to it. It's like a special music.
모모Richard: Too bad we can't bottle the sound.
모모Marilyn: But we can!
모모Richard: Can what?
모모Marilyn: Bottle the sound.
모모Richard: What are you talking about?
모모Richard: Oh, yeah? Great idea! Let's do it!
모모Act 3.
모모Marilyn: I'm so glad everyone is asleep. I thought Max would be crying, and everybody would be a wake.
모모Richard: What did I tell you? Nothing to worry about.
모모Susan: I'm sure everything is fine. My mother knows all there is to know about taking care of babies, I assure you.
모모Harry: Let's put some of this stuff away and then take off. We've got a forty-minute drive into the city.
모모Ellen: Welcome home-and I do mean welcome home.
모모Richard: Something wrong?
모모Ellen: Oh, nothing's wrong, Richard. Believe me, Max is fine. But his teeth hurt, and he just can't get to sleep, poor dear.
모모Susan: Neither can you.
모모Marilyn: Oh, I feel so bad.
모모Ellen: Oh, I'm fine. How was your weekend?
모모Harry: We had a great time, Mom.
모모Richard: It was wonderful. The weather couldn't have been better.
모모Ellen: It was nice here, too.
모모Marilyn: Did you get a chance to get outside at all?
모모Ellen: Oh, yes. Grandpa helped me yesterday afternoon. I went to the supermarket to get a few things, and I stayed out an extra half hour. The village was filled people-the weather was so nice.
모모Richard: Harry's a professional camper, Mom. He knows all there is to know, and he made the weekend very easy for us to enjoy.
모모Harry: Come on. You all helped.
모모Susan: You were wonderful, Harry!
모모Marilyn: Why don't you go to your room, Mom, and get some sleep.
모모Ellen: Oh, I'm fine. Tell me more about your weekend. Did you do anything special?
모모Susan: Lots of special country things. We picked flowers.
모모Marilyn: And we brought some home for you. It was so nice to be out in the country.
모모Ellen: They smell wonderful.
모모Marilyn: Everything smelled so special. It would have been great if we had been able to bottle the smells.
모모Harry: It would be a great business if you could do that.
모모Ellen: Oh!
모모Marilyn: Uh, we're home now, Ellen. We'll take care of it.
모모Richard: I'll take care of it. Let's see if it works.
모모Ellen: What's that?
모모Richard: A little we'd better head home. It's getting late, and we have a bit of a drive.
모모Harry: Well, all your things are inside. There's your sleeping bag.
모모Marilyn: Oh, thanks, Harry.
모모Harry: Say good-bye to Richard. We'll call you all tomorrow night.
모모Marilyn: Good-bye.
모모Susan: Bye, Mom.
모모Ellen: Bye-bye.
모모Marilyn: Bye.
모모Ellen: I'm so tired I think I'm overtired. I don't know if I can get to sleep.
모모Ellen: Max has stopped crying.
모모Marilyn: Yes. It works!
모모Richard: It works!
모모Ellen: What works?
모모Richard: This.
모모Ellen: Oh. Oh, where did you get that? It sounds so nice. I think I'm falling asleep.
모모Richard: Like Max did.
모모Richard: Good night.
모모Marilyn: Good night. Sounds of the country. The soothing sounds of the country.
모모Episode 26 Opening Night
모모Act 1.
모모Carlson: A little further to the right, Tom.
모모Tom: Is this OK?
모모Carlson: Good. What do you think ,Richard?
모모Richard: I like it there.
모모Carlson: It's the first thing people will see when they come in. It sets the tone for the whole show. The next thing they'll see is this enlargement with the words Family Album, U.S.A.
모모Richard: I can't believe this is really happening!
모모Carlson: You've earned it. Years of work went into these pictures.
모모Richard: I know, but it's still a dream come true.
모모Carlson: Well, remember, we're not sure what the critics are going to write about your show yet. And you never know what the man from the New York Times is going to say about it.
모모Richard: Are you worried?
모모Carlson: I always worry. The reviews of this show are important for the sales of your book.
모모Richard: When do we see the reviews?
모모Carlson: Soon. One of the critics is coming over this morning for a preview. I hope he's in a good mood.
모모Richard: So do I. Marilyn and I hope to use money from the sales of this book to buy a new house.
모모Carlson: The book will be a success. And the show will help promote it.
모모Richard: Speaking of promoting the book, do I really have to autograph copies for the guests at the opening?
모모Carlson: It's common practice.
모모Richard: I feel uncomfortable about it.
모모Carlson: A lot of people come to openings just so they can get the autograph of somebody who may be famous someday.
모모Richard: Couldn't we wait until I'm famous?
모모Carlson: A little further back, Tom. It's too close to the refreshments.
모모Richard: No, I think this one belongs in the "people-at-work" section.
모모Carlson: You may be right. Try it there, Tom
모모Tom: Right.
모모Carlson: Nervous about the opening tonight?
모모Richard: Nervous? Me? No. I'm scared to death.
모모Carlson: How about guests? How many people will you be bringing?
모모Richard: Well, my family, I guess. My wife Marilyn, my father and mother, my brother Robbie, my sister and her husband and their daughter. And my grandfather. Is that too many?
모모Carlson: No such thing as" too many" at an opening.
모모Richard: I hope they like it.
모모Carlson: Your family or the pubic?
모모Richard: Everybody. But especially my family. They've stood by me through all this.
모모Carlson: I'm sure they'll like it.
모모Mitchell: Harvey, how are you?
모모Carlson: Mitchell, so nice of you to come. Richard, this is Mitchell Johnson. Mitchell is one of the most important syndicated reviewers in the country.
모모Mitchell: Well, you're the young man who did all this.
모모Richard: I'm afraid so.
모모Mitchell: Nice to meet you.
모모Richard: Nict to meet you, Mr. Johnson.
모모Carlson: Mitchell has always encouraged new talent.
모모Mitchell: Well...you mind if I look around and see what it says to me?
모모Carlson: Be our guest.
모모Mitchell: Mm-hmm, hmm, uh-huh.
모모Richard: What does that mean when he goes, "Mm-hmm, mm-hmm,mm-hmm"?
모모Carlson: It probably means he's clearing his throat. I don't know.
모모Tom: I don't care what the critics say, Mr.Stewart. Your work is brilliant.
모모Richard: Thank you, Tom.
모모Carlson: Tom is studying photography at NYU. He's working with me during the summer months as an intern.
모모Richard: Oh, really? I'd like to see your work.
모모Tom: It's not good enough to show. I'm still learning.
모모Richard: Oh, I'd still like to see your work. You may be the next Ansel Adams and not even know it.
모모Tom: If you really mean it, I'll bring some of my pictures into the gallery.
모모Richard: I do mean it.
모모Mitchell: Very interesting pictures, Mr.Stewart. You have a most unusual eye.
모모Richard: Thank you. I hope that's a compliment.
모모Mitchell: It is.
모모Carlson: Are you going to be reviewing the show, Mitchell?
모모Mitchell: Oh, yes. It's definitely worth reviewing.
모모Carlson: Favorably?
모모Mitchell: Oh, you know I never answer that question, Harvey. I'd like an advance copy of the book, though, so I can study it.
모모Carlson: I have an autographed one in my office. Tom, would you give Mr.Johnson the copy of Richard's book on my desk?
모모Tom: Just follow me, Mr.Johnson.
모모Mitchell: Sure.
모모Richard: Do you think he liked my photographs?
모모Carlson: We'll know when tonight's papers come out. Keep your fingers crossed.
모모Act 2.
모모Marilyn: Do you like the dress?
모모Richard: I love it.
모모Marilyn: I designed it myself.
모모Richard: It's beautiful.
모모Marilyn: Are you ready? We're supposed to be there before the guests arrive.
모모Richard: I know. I know. Help me with this tie, will you? Honey, I'm scared to death.
모모Marilyn: But this is what you've been working for all these years.
모모Richard: No, no. I worked to put together a book of photographs. This is show business.
모모Marilyn: Well, it's all part of the same job. Just relax and enjoy it.
모모Richard: You're right. I earned this, and I'm going to enjoy it. As soon as I recover from my nervous breakdown.
모모Marilyn: What are you afraid of?
모모Richard: Everything. A critic was there this morning. He probably hates my work. I have to sign copies of my book for a lot of people I never met before. My new shoes hurt my feet...
모모Marilyn: You're going to be a great success. Are you ready?
모모Richard: As soon as I get these cuff links on.
모모Marilyn: Let me help. Mom and Dad are already on their way down to the gallery.
모모Marilyn: There! You look very attractive.
모모Richard: Thank you. Well, I suppose I'v run out of excuses.
모모Marilyn: Mm-hmm. Let's go...
모모Richard: Oh, one minute. Before we go to the gallery, I just want to tell you that I never could have done this book without your help and your love. I appreciate it.
모모Marilyn: Thanks. Now, no more stalling.
모모Marilyn: What is it?
모모Richard: There's nobody here!
모모Marilyn: Of course not, Richard. Your show doesn't begin until eight thirty.
모모Richard: Oh. Right.
모모Carlson: Richard! Welcome! Good luck tonight!
모모Richard: Well, thanks. This is my publisher. Harvey Carlson. You've met my wife Marilyn...
모모Carlson: Charmed.
모모Marilyn: Hi.
모모Richard: My mother, Ellen Stewart. Harvey Carlson.
모모Carlson: It's good to meet you.
모모Ellen: It's nice to meet you.
모모Richard: This is my father, Dr.Philip Stewart...
모모Philip: Nice to meet you, Mr. Carlson.
모모Richard: My brother Robbie...
모모Robbie: Hi.
모모Carlson: Hi.
모모Richard: And this is my sister Susan and her husband Harry Bennett and his daughter Michelle.
모모Carlson: It's nice to meet you.
모모Richard: And this gentleman is my grandfather, Malcolm Stewart.
모모Carlson: Welcome, Mr.Stewart. Well, make yourselves comfortable. There are hors d'oeuvres at the table, fruit punch at the bar. Help yourselves. Can I get you something, Mr.Setwart?
모모Grandpa: No, thank you.
모모Carlson: You can feel very proud of your grandson, Mr.Stewart.
모모Grandpa: I do. I'm proud of all my grandchildren, Mr.Carlson.
모모Carlson: Of course. Feel free to look around. If you need anything, just ask.
모모Grandpa: Thank you.
모모Richard: Harvey?
모모Carlson: Yes?
모모Richard: Did Mitchell Johnson's review come out yet?
모모Carlson: Not yet. The newpapers don't come out till about ten 0'clock. When they come out, we'll get it.
모모Richard: Thanks.
모모Carlson: Ready?
모모Richard: Yes. Have the people arrived?
모모Carlson: The guests are waiting. Tom's about to open the doors. Good luck! And stop worrying! They're going to love it.
모모Act 3.
모모Richard: What's this?
모모Carlson: Read it.
모모Richard: I can't. Would you read it, Marilyn?
모모Marilyn: "Richard Stewart's show at the Carlson Gallery is a collection of photographs from his new book entitled Family Album, U.S.A. There is power and beauty in. Mr. Stewart's work, and his book introduces us to a remarkable new talent." Oh, Richard, it's wonderful!
모모Carlson: Congratulations!
모모Richard: Wow! I'm overwhelmed.
모모Carlson: Ladies and gentlemen, if I may have your attention for a moment, please? I hope you're all enjoying the exhibition. I know that I am. And I would like to introduce the young man who spent the last five years taking these remarkable pictures and writing the background for Family. Album, U.S.A-Mr Richard Stewart.
모모Richard: Hello. I want to thank all of you for coming here tonight. I'd like to thank Harvey Carlson for his faith in my project. But most of all, I would like to thank my family for their love and support all through this adventure. Thank you.
모모Richard: Oh, I'm glad this's over.
모모Tom: Would you mind?
모모Richard: Oh, not at all.
모모Tom: Thanks.
모모Richard: Our pleasure. Hope it wins a Pulitzer Prize.
모모Tom: I'll settle for an "A" in my photography course.
모모Carlson: Ah, Richard, Marilyn, I want you to meet John O'Neill.
모모Richard: Oh,how do you do ?
모모Marilyn: Nice to meet you.
모모O'Neill: I've been looking forward to meeting your husband, Mrs. Stewart. I'm really impressed by your show.
모모Richard: Thank you.
모모O'Neill: In fact, I'd like your autograph.
모모Richard: Oh, well, really...
모모O'Neill: On a contract.
모모Richard: What's this about, Harvey?
모모Carlson: Mr. O'Neill is the publisher of several magazines.
모모Marilyn: Of course. I've seen you on television.
모모Carlson: Mr. O'Neill was so impressed with your work that he wants to develop it into a magazine concept.
모모Richard: Well, that sounds very exciting, but where would I fit into the plan?
모모O'Neill: I'd like you to be the photo editor of the magazine.
모모Marilyn: Oh, Richard, how exciting!
모모Carlson: It's a wonderful opportunity, Richard.
모모Richard: Hold on. Wait a minute, please.
모모Carlson: What's the problem, Richard?
모모Richard: The problem is that I'm a photographer, not an editor. I like what I do. In fact, I love what I do...which is going out with a camera and a roll of film and seeing the wonder of humanity. Now, I appreciate your offer, but I've worked so hard on Family Album, U.S.A. and I'm giving some thought to a new book on a different subject. I'm flattered, but I enjoy taking pictures, and I want to continue doing that. Thank you, but I'm happy being a photographer.
모모O'Neill: I understand, Richard.
모모Carlson: Richard, I know your next book will be a success. Congratulations!
모모Richard: Thanks.
모모Marilyn: You're a real Stewart!
모모Richard: Thanks.
모모(the end)