Breakfast at Tiffany's
   I am always drawn back to places where I have lived, the houses and their neighborhoods. For instance,there is a brownstone in the East Seventies where, during the early years of the war, I had my first NewYork apartment. It was one room crowded with attic furniture, a sofa and fat chairs upholstered in thatitchy, particular red velvet that one associates with hot days on a tram. The walls were stucco, and acolor rather like tobacco-spit. Everywhere, in the bathroom too, there were prints of Roman ruinsfreckled brown with age. The single window looked out on a fire escape. Even so, my spirits heightenedwhenever I felt in my pocket the key to this apartment; with all its gloom, it still was a place of my own,the first, and my books were there, and jars of pencils to sharpen, everything I needed, so I felt, tobecome the writer I wanted to be.
　　It never occurred to me in those days to write about Holly Golightly, and probably it would not nowexcept for a conversation I had with Joe Bell that set the whole memory of her in motion again.
　　Holly Golightly had been a tenant in the old brownstone; she'd occupied the apartment below mine. Asfor Joe Bell, he ran a bar around the corner on Lexington Avenue; he still does. Both Holly and I used togo there six, seven times a day, not for a drink, not always, but to make telephone calls: during the war aprivate telephone was hard to come by. Moreover, Joe Bell was good about taking messages, which inHolly's case was no small favor, for she had a tremendous many.
　　Of course this was a long time ago, and until last week I hadn't seen Joe Bell in several years. Off and onwe'd kept in touch, and occasionally I'd stopped by his bar when passing through the neighborhood; butactually we'd never been strong friends except in as much as we were both friends of Holly Golightly. JoeBell hasn't an easy nature, he admits it himself, he says it's because he's a bachelor and has a sourstomach. Anyone who knows him will tell you he's a hard man to talk to. Impossible if you don't share hisfixations, of which Holly is one. Some others are: ice hockey, Weimaraner dogs,Our Gal Sunday (asoap serial he has listened to for fifteen years), and Gilbert and Sullivan -- he claims to be related to oneor the other, I can't remember which.
　　And so when, late last Tuesday afternoon, the telephone rang and I heard "Joe Bell here," I knew it mustbe about Holly. He didn't say so, just: "Can you rattle right over here? It's important," and there was acroak of excitement in his froggy voice.
　　I took a taxi in a downpour of October rain, and on my way I even thought she might be there, that Iwould see Holly again.
　　But there was no one on the premises except the proprietor. Joe Bell's is a quiet place compared tomost Lexington Avenue bars. It boasts neither neon nor television. Two old mirrors reflect the weatherfrom the streets; and behind the bar, in a niche surrounded by photographs of ice-hockey stars, there isalways a large bowl of fresh flowers that Joe Bell himself arranges with matronly care. That is what hewas doing when I came in.
　　"Naturally," he said, rooting a gladiola deep into the bowl, "naturally I wouldn't have got you over here ifit wasn't I wanted your opinion. It's peculiar. A very peculiar thing has happened."
　　"Naturally," he said, rooting a gladiola deep into the bowl, "naturally I wouldn't have got you over here ifit wasn't I wanted your opinion. It's peculiar. A very peculiar thing has happened."
　　He fingered a leaf, as though uncertain of how to answer. A small man with a fine head of coarse whitehair, he has a bony, sloping face better suited to someone far taller; his complexion seems permanentlysunburned: now it grew even redder. "I can't say exactly heard from her. I mean, I don't know. That'swhy I want your opinion. Let me build you a drink. Something new. They call it a White Angel," he said,mixing one-half vodka, one-half gin, no vermouth. While I drank the result, Joe Bell stood sucking on aTums and turning over in his mind what he had to tell me. Then: "You recall a certain Mr. I.Y. Yunioshi?A gentleman from Japan."
　　"From California," I said, recalling Mr. Yunioshi perfectly. He's a photographer on one of the picturemagazines, and when I knew him he lived in the studio apartment on the top floor of the brownstone.
　　"Don't go mixing me up. All I'm asking, you know who I mean? Okay. So last night who comes waltzingin here but this selfsame Mr. I. Y. Yunioshi. I haven't seen him, I guess it's over two years. And where doyou think he's been those two years?"
　　"Africa."
　　Joe Bell stopped crunching on his Tums, his eyes narrowed. "So how did you know?"
　　"Read it in Winchell." Which I had, as a matter of fact.
　　He rang open his cash register, and produced a manila envelope. "Well, see did you read this inWinchell."
　　In the envelope were three photographs, more or less the same, though taken from different angles: a talldelicate Negro man wearing a calico skirt and with a shy, yet vain smile, displaying in his hands an oddwood sculpture, an elongated carving of a head, a girl's, her hair sleek and short as a young man's, hersmooth wood eyes too large and tilted in the tapering face, her mouth wide, overdrawn, not unlikeclown-lips. On a glance it resembled most primitive carving; and then it didn't, for here was thespit-image of Holly Golightly, at least as much of a likeness as a dark still thing could be.
　　"Now what do you make of that?" said Joe Bell, satisfied with my puzzlement.
　　"It looks like her."
　　"Listen, boy," and he slapped his hand on the bar, "it is her. Sure as I'm a man fit to wear britches. Thelittle Jap knew it was her the minute he saw her."
　　"He saw her? In Africa?"
　　"Well. Just the statue there. But it comes to the same thing. Read the facts for yourself," he said, turningover one of the photographs. On the reverse was written: Wood Carving, S Tribe, Tococul, East Anglia,Christmas Day, 1956.
　　He said, "Here's what the Jap says," and the story was this: On Christmas day Mr. Yunioshi had passed
　　with his camera through Tococul, a village in the tangles of nowhere and of no interest, merely acongregation of mud huts with monkeys in the yards and buzzards on the roofs. He'd decided to move onwhen he saw suddenly a Negro squatting in a doorway carving monkeys on a walking stick. Mr.Yunioshi was impressed and asked to see more of his work. Whereupon he was shown the carving ofthe girl's head: and felt, so he told Joe Bell, as if he were falling in a dream. But when he offered to buy itthe Negro cupped his private parts in his hand (apparently a tender gesture, comparable to tapping one'sheart) and said no. A pound of salt and ten dollars, a wristwatch and two pounds of salt and twentydollars, nothing swayed him. Mr. Yunioshi was in all events determined to learn how the carving came tobe made. It cost him his salt and his watch, and the incident was conveyed in African and pig-English andfinger-talk. But it would seem that in the spring of that year a party of three white persons had appearedout of the brush riding horseback. A young woman and two men. The men, both red-eyed with fever,were forced for several weeks to stay shut and shivering in an isolated hut, while the young woman,having presently taken a fancy to the wood-carver, shared the woodcarver's mat.
　　with his camera through Tococul, a village in the tangles of nowhere and of no interest, merely acongregation of mud huts with monkeys in the yards and buzzards on the roofs. He'd decided to move onwhen he saw suddenly a Negro squatting in a doorway carving monkeys on a walking stick. Mr.Yunioshi was impressed and asked to see more of his work. Whereupon he was shown the carving ofthe girl's head: and felt, so he told Joe Bell, as if he were falling in a dream. But when he offered to buy itthe Negro cupped his private parts in his hand (apparently a tender gesture, comparable to tapping one'sheart) and said no. A pound of salt and ten dollars, a wristwatch and two pounds of salt and twentydollars, nothing swayed him. Mr. Yunioshi was in all events determined to learn how the carving came tobe made. It cost him his salt and his watch, and the incident was conveyed in African and pig-English andfinger-talk. But it would seem that in the spring of that year a party of three white persons had appearedout of the brush riding horseback. A young woman and two men. The men, both red-eyed with fever,were forced for several weeks to stay shut and shivering in an isolated hut, while the young woman,having presently taken a fancy to the wood-carver, shared the woodcarver's mat.
　　"And then?"
　　"Then nothing," he shrugged. "By and by she went like she come, rode away on a horse."
　　"Alone, or with the two men?"
　　Joe Bell blinked. "With the two men, I guess. Now the Jap, he asked about her up and down thecountry. But nobody else had ever seen her." Then it was as if he could feel my own sense of letdowntransmitting itself to him, and he wanted no part of it. "One thing you got to admit, it's the onlydefinitenews in I don't know how many" -- he counted on his fingers: there weren't enough -- "years. All I hope,I hope she's rich. She must be rich. You got to be rich to go mucking around in Africa."
　　"She's probably never set foot in Africa," I said, believing it; yet I could see her there, it was somewhereshe would have gone. And the carved head: I looked at the photographs again.
　　"You know so much, where is she?"
　　"Dead. Or in a crazy house. Or married. I think she's married and quieted down and maybe right in thisvery city."
　　He considered a moment. "No," he said, and shook his head. "I'll tell you why. If she was in this city I'dhave seen her. You take a man that likes to walk, a man like me, a man's been walking in the streetsgoing on ten or twelve years, and all those years he's got his eye out for one person, and nobody's everher, don't it stand to reason she's not there? I see pieces of her all the time, a flat little bottom, any skinnygirl that walks fast and straight -- " He paused, as though too aware of how intently I was looking at him."You think I'm round the bend?"
　　"It's just that I didn't know you'd been in love with her. Not like that."
　　I was sorry I'd said it; it disconcerted him. He scooped up the photographs and put them back in theirenvelope. I looked at my watch. I hadn't any place to go, but I thought it was better to leave.
　　"Hold on," he said, gripping my wrist. "Sure I loved her. But it wasn't that I wanted to touch her." Andhe added, without smiling: "Not that I don't think about that side of things. Even at my age, and I'll be
　　sixty-seven January ten. It's a peculiar fact -- but, the older I grow, that side of things seems to be on mymind more and more. I don't remember thinking about it so much even when I was a youngster and it'severy other minute. Maybe the older you grow and the less easy it is to put thought into action, maybethat's why it gets all locked up in your head and becomes a burden. Whenever I read in the paper aboutan old man disgracing himself, I know it's because of this burden. But" -- he poured himself a jigger ofwhiskey and swallowed it neat -- "I'll never disgrace myself. And I swear, it never crossed my mindabout Holly. You can love somebody without it being like that. You keep them a stranger, a strangerwho's a friend."
　　sixty-seven January ten. It's a peculiar fact -- but, the older I grow, that side of things seems to be on mymind more and more. I don't remember thinking about it so much even when I was a youngster and it'severy other minute. Maybe the older you grow and the less easy it is to put thought into action, maybethat's why it gets all locked up in your head and becomes a burden. Whenever I read in the paper aboutan old man disgracing himself, I know it's because of this burden. But" -- he poured himself a jigger ofwhiskey and swallowed it neat -- "I'll never disgrace myself. And I swear, it never crossed my mindabout Holly. You can love somebody without it being like that. You keep them a stranger, a strangerwho's a friend."
　　"That you didn't want to touch her?"
　　"I mean about Africa."
　　At that moment I couldn't seem to remember the story, only the image of her riding away on a horse."Anyway, she's gone."
　　"Yeah," he said, opening the door. "Just gone."
　　Outside, the rain had stopped, there was only a mist of it in the air, so I turned the corner and walkedalong the street where the brownstone stands. It is a street with trees that in the summer make coolpatterns on the pavement; but now the leaves were yellowed and mostly down, and the rain had madethem slippery, they skidded underfoot. The brownstone is midway in the block, next to a church where ablue tower-clock tolls the hours. It has been sleeked up since my day; a smart black door has replacedthe old frosted glass, and gray elegant shutters frame the windows. No one I remember still lives thereexcept Madame Sapphia Spanella, a husky coloratura who every afternoon went roller-skating in CentralPark. I know she's still there because I went up the steps and looked at the mailboxes. It was one ofthese mailboxes that had first made me aware of Holly Golightly.
　　I'd been living in the house about a week when I noticed that the mailbox belonging to Apt. 2 had aname-slot fitted with a curious card. Printed, rather Cartier-formal, it read:Miss Holiday Golightly ; and,underneath, in the corner,Traveling . It nagged me like a tune:Miss Holiday Golightly, Traveling .
　　One night, it was long past twelve, I woke up at the sound of Mr. Yunioshi calling down the stairs. Sincehe lived on the top floor, his voice fell through the whole house, exasperated and stern. "Miss Golightly! Imust protest!"
　　The voice that came back, welling up from the bottom of the stairs, was silly-young and self-amused."Oh, darling, Iam sorry. I lost the goddamn key."
　　"You cannot go on ringing my bell. You must please, please have yourself a key made."
　　"But I lose them all."
　　"I work, I have to sleep," Mr. Yunioshi shouted. "But always you are ringing my bell´"
　　"Oh,don't be angry, youdear little man: Iwon't do it again. And if you promise not to be angry" -- her
　　voice was coming nearer, she was climbing the stairs -- "I might let you take those pictures wementioned."
　　voice was coming nearer, she was climbing the stairs -- "I might let you take those pictures wementioned."
　　"When?" he said.
　　The girl laughed. "Sometime," she answered, slurring the word.
　　"Any time," he said, and closed his door.
　　I went out into the hall and leaned over the banister, just enough to see without being seen. She was stillon the stairs, now she reached the landing, and the ragbag colors of her boy's hair, tawny streaks, strandsof albino-blond and yellow, caught the hall light. It was a warm evening, nearly summer, and she wore aslim cool black dress, black sandals, a pearl choker. For all her chic thinness, she had an almostbreakfast-cereal air of health, a soap and lemon cleanness, a rough pink darkening in the cheeks. Hermouth was large, her nose upturned. A pair of dark glasses blotted out her eyes. It was a face beyondchildhood, yet this side of belonging to a woman. I thought her anywhere between sixteen and thirty; as itturned out, she was shy two months of her nineteenth birthday.
　　She was not alone. There was a man following behind her. The way his plump hand clutched at her hipseemed somehow improper; not morally, aesthetically. He was short and vast, sun-lamped andpomaded, a man in a buttressed pin-stripe suit with a red carnation withering in the lapel. When theyreached her door she rummaged her purse in search of a key, and took no notice of the fact that his thicklips were nuzzling the nape of her neck. At last, though, finding the key and opening her door, she turnedto him cordially: "Bless you, darling -- you were sweet to see me home."
　　"Hey, baby!" he said, for the door was closing in his face.
　　"Yes, Harry?"
　　"Harry was the other guy. I'm Sid. Sid Arbuck. You like me."
　　"I worship you, Mr. Arbuck. But good night, Mr. Arbuck."
　　Mr. Arbuck stared with disbelief as the door shut firmly. "Hey, baby, let me in baby. You like me baby.
　　"I'm a liked guy. Didn't I pick up the check, five people,your friends, I never seen them before? Don'tthat give me the right you should like me? You like me, baby."
　　He tapped on the door gently, then louder; finally he took several steps back, his body hunched andlowering, as though he meant to charge it, crash it down. Instead, he plunged down the stairs, slamming afist against the wall. Just as he reached the bottom, the door of the girl's apartment opened and shepoked out her head.
　　"Oh, Mr.Arbuck ... "
　　He turned back, a smile of relief oiling his face: she'd only been teasing.
　　"The next time a girl wants a little powder-room change," she called, not teasing at all, "take my advice,
　　darling:don't give her twenty-cents!"
　　darling:don't give her twenty-cents!"
　　Of course we'd never met. Though actually, on the stairs, in the street, we often came face-to-face; butshe seemed not quite to see me. She was never without dark glasses, she was always well groomed,there was a consequential good taste in the plainness of her clothes, the blues and grays and lack of lusterthat made her, herself, shine so. One might have thought her a photographer's model, perhaps a youngactress, except that it was obvious, judging from her hours, she hadn't time to be either.
　　Now and then I ran across her outside our neighborhood. Once a visiting relative took me to "21," andthere, at a superior table, surrounded by four men, none of them Mr. Arbuck, yet all of theminterchangeable with him, was Miss Golightly, idly, publicly combing her hair; and her expression, anunrealized yawn, put, by example, a dampener, on the excitement I felt over dining at so swanky a place.Another night, deep in the summer, the heat of my room sent me out into the streets. I walked downThird Avenue to Fifty-first Street, where there was an antique store with an object in its window Iadmired: a palace of a bird cage, a mosque of minarets and bamboo rooms yearning to be filled withtalkative parrots. But the price was three hundred and fifty dollars. On the way home I noticed acab-driver crowd gathered in front of P. J. Clark's saloon, apparently attracted there by a happy groupof whiskey-eyed Australian army officers baritoning, "Waltzing Matilda." As they sang they took turnsspin-dancing a girl over the cobbles under the El; and the girl, Miss Golightly, to be sure, floated round intheir, arms light as a scarf.
　　But if Miss Golightly remained unconscious of my existence, except as a doorbell convenience, Ibecame, through the summer, rather an authority on hers. I discovered, from observing the trash-basketoutside her door, that her regular reading consisted of tabloids and travel folders and astrological charts;that she smoked an esoteric cigarette called Picayunes; survived on cottage cheese and melba toast; thather vari-colored hair was somewhat self-induced. The same source made it evident that she receivedV-letters by the bale. They were always torn into strips like bookmarks. I used occasionally to pluckmyself a bookmark in passing.Remember andmiss you andrain andplease write anddamn andgoddamn were the words that recurred most often on these slips; those, andlonesome andlove .
　　Also, she had a cat and she played the guitar. On days when the sun was strong, she would wash herhair, and together with the cat, a red tiger-striped tom, sit out on the fire escape thumbing a guitar whileher hair dried. Whenever I heard the music, I would go stand quietly by my window. She played verywell, and sometimes sang too. Sang in the hoarse, breaking tones of a boy's adolescent voice. She knewall the show hits, Cole Porter and Kurt Weill; especially she liked the songs fromOklahoma! , whichwere new that summer and everywhere. But there were moments when she played songs that made youwonder where she learned them, where indeed she came from. Harsh-tender wandering tunes withwords that smacked of pineywoods or prairie. One went:Don't wanna sleep, Don't wanna die, Justwanna go a-travelin' through the pastures of the sky; and this one seemed to gratify her the most, foroften she continued it long after her hair had dried, after the sun had gone and there were lightedwindows in the dusk.
　　But our acquaintance did not make headway until September, an evening with the first ripple-chills ofautumn running through it. I'd been to a movie, come home and gone to bed with a bourbon nightcap andthe newest Simenon: so much my idea of comfort that I couldn't understand a sense of unease thatmultiplied until I could hear my heart beating. It was a feeling I'd read about, written about, but neverbefore experienced. The feeling of being watched. Of someone in the room. Then: an abrupt rapping atthe window, a glimpse of ghostly gray: I spilled the bourbon. It was some little while before I could bringmyself to open the window, and ask Miss Golightly what she wanted.
　　But our acquaintance did not make headway until September, an evening with the first ripple-chills ofautumn running through it. I'd been to a movie, come home and gone to bed with a bourbon nightcap andthe newest Simenon: so much my idea of comfort that I couldn't understand a sense of unease thatmultiplied until I could hear my heart beating. It was a feeling I'd read about, written about, but neverbefore experienced. The feeling of being watched. Of someone in the room. Then: an abrupt rapping atthe window, a glimpse of ghostly gray: I spilled the bourbon. It was some little while before I could bringmyself to open the window, and ask Miss Golightly what she wanted.
　　"Not at all."
　　She seemed disappointed. "Yes, you do. Everybody does. I don't mind. It's useful."
　　She sat down on one of the rickety red-velvet chairs, curved her legs underneath her, and glanced roundthe room, her eyes puckering more pronouncedly. "How can you bear it? It's a chamber of horrors."
　　"Oh, you get used to anything," I said, annoyed with myself, for actually I was proud of the place.
　　"I don't. I'll never get used to anything. Anybody that does, they might as well be dead." Her dispraisingeyes surveyed the room again. "What do youdo here all day?"
　　I motioned toward a table tall with books and paper. "Write things."
　　"I thought writers were quite old. Of course Saroyan isn't old. I met him at a party, and really he isn't oldat all. In fact," she mused, "if he'd give himself a closer shave ... by the way, is Hemingway old?"
　　"In his forties, I should think."
　　"That's not bad. I can't get excited by a man until he's forty-two. I know this idiot girl who keeps tellingme I ought to go to a head-shrinker; she says I have a father complex. Which is so muchmerde . I simplytrained myself to like older men, and it was the smartest thing I ever did. How old is W. SomersetMaugham?"
　　"I'm not sure. Sixty-something."
　　"That's not bad. I've never been to bed with a writer. No, wait: do you know Benny Shacklett?" She
　　frowned when I shook my head. "That's funny. He's written an awful lot of radio stuff. But quel rat. Tellme, are you a real writer?"
　　frowned when I shook my head. "That's funny. He's written an awful lot of radio stuff. But quel rat. Tellme, are you a real writer?"
　　"Well, darling, does anyonebuy what you write?"
　　"Not yet."
　　"I'm going to help you," she said. "I can, too. Think of all the people I know who know people. I'mgoing to help you because you look like my brother Fred. Only smaller. I haven't seen him since I wasfourteen, that's when I left home, and he was already six-feet-two. My other brothers were more yoursize, runts. It was the peanut butter that made Fred so tall. Everybody thought it was dotty, the way hegorged himself on peanut butter; he didn't care about anything in this world except horses and peanutbutter. But he wasn't dotty, just sweet and vague and terribly slow; he'd been in the eighth grade threeyears when I ran away. Poor Fred. I wonder if the Army's generous with their peanut butter. Whichreminds me, I'm starving."
　　I pointed to a bowl of apples, at the same time asked her how and why she'd left home so young. Shelooked at me blankly, and rubbed her nose, as though it tickled: a gesture, seeing often repeated, I cameto recognize as a signal that one was trespassing. Like many people with a bold fondness for volunteeringintimate information, anything that suggested a direct question, a pinning-down, put her on guard. Shetook a bite of apple, and said: "Tell me something you've written. The story part."
　　"That's one of the troubles. They're not the kind of stories youcan tell."
　　"Too dirty?"
　　"Maybe I'll let you read one sometime."
　　"Whiskey and apples go together. Fix me a drink, darling. Then you can read me a story yourself."
　　Very few authors, especially the unpublished, can resist an invitation to read aloud. I made us both adrink and, settling in a chair opposite, began to read to her, my voice a little shaky with a combination ofstage fright and enthusiasm: it was a new story, I'd finished it the day before, and that inevitable sense ofshortcoming had not had time to develop. It was about two women who share a house, schoolteachers,one of whom, when the other becomes engaged, spreads with anonymous notes a scandal that preventsthe marriage. As I read, each glimpse I stole of Holly made my heart contract. She fidgeted. She pickedapart the butts in an ashtray, she mooned over her fingernails, as though longing for a file; worse, when Idid seem to have her interest, there was actually a telltale frost over her eyes, as if she were wonderingwhether to buy a pair of shoes she'd seen in some window.
　　"Is that theend? " she asked, waking up. She floundered for something more to say. "Of course I likedykes themselves. They don't scare me a bit. But stories about dykes bore the bejesus out of me. I justcan't put myself in their shoes. Well really, darling," she said, because I was clearly puzzled, "if it's notabout a couple of old bull-dykes, what the hellis it about?"
　　But I was in no mood to compound the mistake of having read the story with the further embarrassmentof explaining it. The same vanity that had led to such exposure, now forced me to mark her down as aninsensitive, mindless show-off.
　　"Incidentally," she said, "do you happen to know any nice lesbians? I'm looking for a roommate. Well,don't laugh. I'm so disorganized, I simply can't afford a maid; and really, dykes are wonderfulhome-makers, they love to do all the work, you never have to bother about brooms and defrosting andsending out the laundry. I had a roommate in Hollywood, she played in Westerns, they called her theLone Ranger; but I'll say this for her, she was better than a man around the house. Of course peoplecouldn't help but think I must be a bit of a dyke myself. And of course I am. Everyone is: a bit. So what?That never discouraged a man yet, in fact it seems to goad them on. Look at the Lone Ranger, marriedtwice. Usually dykes only get married once, just for the name. It seems to carry such cachet later on tobe called Mrs. Something Another. That's not true!" She was staring at an alarm clock on the table. "Itcan't be four-thirty!"
　　"Incidentally," she said, "do you happen to know any nice lesbians? I'm looking for a roommate. Well,don't laugh. I'm so disorganized, I simply can't afford a maid; and really, dykes are wonderfulhome-makers, they love to do all the work, you never have to bother about brooms and defrosting andsending out the laundry. I had a roommate in Hollywood, she played in Westerns, they called her theLone Ranger; but I'll say this for her, she was better than a man around the house. Of course peoplecouldn't help but think I must be a bit of a dyke myself. And of course I am. Everyone is: a bit. So what?That never discouraged a man yet, in fact it seems to goad them on. Look at the Lone Ranger, marriedtwice. Usually dykes only get married once, just for the name. It seems to carry such cachet later on tobe called Mrs. Something Another. That's not true!" She was staring at an alarm clock on the table. "Itcan't be four-thirty!"
　　"What is today?"
　　"Thursday."
　　"Thursday." She stood up. "My God," she said, and sat down again with a moan. "It's too gruesome."
　　I was tired enough not to be curious. I lay down on the bed and closed my eyes. Still it was irresistible:"What's gruesome about Thursday?"
　　"Nothing. Except that I can never remember when it's coming. You see, on Thursdays I have to catchthe eight forty-five. They're so particular about visiting hours, so if you're there by ten that gives you anhour before the poor men eat lunch. Think of it, lunch at eleven. You can go at two, and I'd so muchrather, but he likes me to come in the morning, he says it sets him up for the rest of the day. I'vegot tostay awake," she said, pinching her cheeks until the roses came, "there isn't time to sleep, I'd lookconsumptive, I'd sag like a tenement, and that wouldn't be fair: a girl can't go to Sing Sing with a greenface."
　　"I suppose not." The anger I felt at her over my story was ebbing; she absorbed me again.
　　"All the visitorsdo make an effort to look their best, and it's very tender, it's sweet as hell, the way thewomen wear their prettiest everything, I mean the old ones and the really poor ones too, they make thedearest effort to look nice and smell nice too, and I love them for it. I love the kids too, especially thecolored ones. I mean the kids the wives bring. It should be sad, seeing the kids there, but it isn't, theyhave ribbons in their hair and lots of shine on their shoes, you'd think there was going to be ice cream;and sometimes that's what it's like in the visitors' room, a party. Anyway it's not like the movies: youknow, grim whisperings through a grille. There isn't any grille, just a counter between you and them, andthe kids can stand on it to be hugged; all you have to do to kiss somebody is lean across. What I likemost, they're so happy to see each other, they've saved up so much to talk about, it isn't possible to bedull, they keep laughing and holding hands. It's different afterwards," she said. "I see them on the train.They sit so quiet watching the river go by." She stretched a strand of hair to the corner of her mouth andnibbled it thoughtfully. "I'm keeping you awake. Go to sleep."
　　"Please. I'm interested."
　　"I know you are. That's why I want you to go to sleep. Because if I keep on, I'll tell you about Sally. I'mnot sure that would be quite cricket." She chewed her hair silently. "They nevertold me not to tell anyone.In so many words. And itis funny. Maybe you could put it in a story with different names and whatnot.Listen, Fred," she said, reaching for another apple, "you've got to cross your heart and kiss your elbow
　　-- "
　　-- "
　　"Well," she said, with a mouthful of apple, "you may have read about him in the papers. His name is SallyTomato, and I speak Yiddish better than he speaks English; but he's a darling old man, terribly pious.He'd look like a monk if it weren't for the gold teeth; he says he prays for me every night. Of course hewas never my lover; as far as that goes, I never knew him until he was already in jail. But I adore himnow, after all I've been going to see him every Thursday for seven months, and I think I'd go even if hedidn't pay me. This one's mushy," she said, and aimed the rest of the apple out the window. "By the way,Idid know Sally by sight. He used to come to Joe Bell's bar, the one around the corner: never talked toanybody, just stand there, like the kind of man who lives in hotel rooms. But it's funny to remember backand realize how closely he must have been watching me, because right after they sent him up (Joe Bellshowed me his picture in the paper. Blackhand. Mafia. All that mumbo jumbo: but they gave him fiveyears) along came this telegram from a lawyer. It said to contact him immediately for information to myadvantage."
　　"You thought somebody had left you a million?"
　　"Not at all. I figured Bergdorf was trying to collect. But I took the gamble and went to see this lawyer (ifhe is a lawyer, which I doubt, since he doesn't seem to have an office, just an answering service, and healways wants to meet you in Hamburg Heaven: that's because he's fat, he can eat ten hamburgers andtwo bowls of relish and a whole lemon meringue pie). He asked me how I'd like to cheer up a lonely oldman, at the same time pick up a hundred a week. I told him look, darling, you've got the wrong MissGolightly, I'm not a nurse that does tricks on the side. I wasn't impressed by the honorarium either; youcan do as well as that on trips to the powder room: any gent with the slightest chic will give you fifty forthe girl's john, and I always ask for cab fare too, that's another fifty. But then he told me his client wasSally Tomato. He said dear old Sally had long admired me┐ la distance , so wouldn't it be a good deedif I went to visit him once a week. Well, I couldn't: it was too romantic."
　　"I don't know. It doesn't sound right."
　　She smiled. "You think I'm lying?"
　　"For one thing, they can't simply letanyone visit a prisoner."
　　"Oh, they don't. In fact they make quite a boring fuss. I'm supposed to be his niece."
　　"And it's as simple as that? For an hour's conversation he gives you a hundred dollars?"
　　"He doesn't, the lawyer does. Mr. O'Shaughnessy mails it to me in cash as soon as I leave the weatherreport."
　　"I think you could get into a lot of trouble," I said, and switched off a lamp; there was no need of it now,morning was in the room and pigeons were gargling on the fire escape.
　　"How?" she said seriously.
　　"There must be something in the law books about false identity. After all, you'renot his niece. And whatabout this weather report?"
　　She patted a yawn. "But it's nothing. Just messages I leave with the answering service so Mr.O'Shaughnessy will know for sure that I've been up there. Sally tells me what to say, things like, oh,'there's a hurricane in Cuba' and 'it's snowing in Palermo.' Don't worry, darling," she said, moving to thebed, "I've taken care of myself a long time." The morning light seemed refracted through her: as shepulled the bed covers up to my chin she gleamed like a transparent child; then she lay down beside me."Do you mind? I only want to rest a moment. So let's don't say another word. Go to sleep."
　　She patted a yawn. "But it's nothing. Just messages I leave with the answering service so Mr.O'Shaughnessy will know for sure that I've been up there. Sally tells me what to say, things like, oh,'there's a hurricane in Cuba' and 'it's snowing in Palermo.' Don't worry, darling," she said, moving to thebed, "I've taken care of myself a long time." The morning light seemed refracted through her: as shepulled the bed covers up to my chin she gleamed like a transparent child; then she lay down beside me."Do you mind? I only want to rest a moment. So let's don't say another word. Go to sleep."
　　"Why are you crying?"
　　She sprang back, sat up. "Oh, for God's sake," she said, starting for the window and the fire escape, "Ihate snoops."
　　The next day, Friday, I came home to find outside my door a grand-luxe Charles & Co. basket with hercard:Miss Holiday Golightly, Traveling : and scribbled on the back in a freakishly awkward,kindergarten hand:Bless you darling Fred. Please forgive the other night. You were an angel aboutthe whole thing. Mille tendresse -- Holly. P.S. I won't bother you again . I replied,Please do , andleft this note at her door with what I could afford, a bunch of street-vendor violets. But apparently she'dmeant what she said; I neither saw nor heard from her, and I gathered she'd gone so far as to obtain adownstairs key. At any rate she no longer rang my bell. I missed that; and as the days merged I began tofeel toward her certain far-fetched resentments, as if I were being neglected by my closest friend. Adisquieting loneliness came into my life, but it induced no hunger for friends of longer acquaintance: theyseemed now like a salt-free, sugarless diet. By Wednesday thoughts of Holly, of Sing Sing and SallyTomato, of worlds where men forked over fifty dollars for the powder room, were so constant that Icouldn't work. That night I left a message in her mailbox:Tomorrow is Thursday . The next morningrewarded me with a second note in the play-pen script:Bless you for reminding me. Can you stop fora drink tonight 6-ish?
　　I waited until ten past six, then made myself delay five minutes more.
　　A creature answered the door. He smelled of cigars and Knize cologne. His shoes sported elevatedheels; without these added inches, one might have taken him for a Little Person. His bald freckled headwas dwarf-big: attached to it were a pair of pointed, truly elfin ears. He had Pekingese eyes, unpityingand slightly bulged. Tufts of hair sprouted from his ears, from his nose; his jowls were gray with afternoonbeard, and his handshake almost furry.
　　"Kid's in the shower," he said, motioning a cigar toward a sound of water hissing in another room. Theroom in which we stood (we were standing because there was nothing to sit on) seemed as though itwere being just moved into; you expected to smell wet paint. Suitcases and unpacked crates were theonly furniture. The crates served as tables. One supported the mixings of a martini; another a lamp, aLibertyphone, Holly's red cat and a bowl of yellow roses. Bookcases, covering one wall, boasted ahalf-shelf of literature. I warmed to the room at once, I liked its fly-by-night look.
　　The man cleared his throat. "You expected?"
　　He found my nod uncertain. His cold eyes operated on me, made neat, exploratory incisions. "A lot ofcharacters come here, they're not expected. You know the kid long?"
　　He found my nod uncertain. His cold eyes operated on me, made neat, exploratory incisions. "A lot ofcharacters come here, they're not expected. You know the kid long?"
　　"So you don't know the kid long?"
　　"I live upstairs."
　　The answer seemed to explain enough to relax him. "You got the same layout?"
　　"Much smaller."
　　He tapped ash on the floor. "This is a dump. This is unbelievable. But the kid don't know how to liveeven when she's got the dough." His speech had a jerky metallic rhythm, like a teletype. "So," he said,"what do you think: is she or ain't she?"
　　"Ain't she what?"
　　"A phony."
　　"I wouldn't have thought so."
　　"You're wrong. She is a phony. But on the other hand you're right. She isn't a phony because she's a realphony. She believes all this crap she believes. You can't talk her out of it. I've tried with tears runningdown my cheeks. Benny Polan, respected everywhere, Benny Polan tried. Benny had it on his mind tomarry her, she don't go for it, Benny spent maybe thousands sending her to head-shrinkers. Even thefamous one, the one can only speak German, boy, did he throw in the towel. You can't talk her out ofthese" -- he made a fist, as though to crush an intangible -- "ideas. Try it sometime. Get her to tell yousome of the stuff she believes. Mind you," he said, "I like the kid. Everybody does, but there's lots thatdon't. I do. I sincerely like the kid. I'm sensitive, that's why. You've got to be sensitive to appreciate her:a streak of the poet. But I'll tell you the truth. You can beat your brains out for her, and she'll hand youhorseshit on a platter. To give an example -- who is she like you see her today? She's strictly a girl you'llread where she ends up at the bottom of a bottle of Seconals. I've seen it happen more times than you'vegot toes: and those kids, they weren't even nuts. She's nuts."
　　"But young. And with a great deal of youth ahead of her."
　　"If you mean future, you're wrong again. Now a couple of years back, out on the Coast, there was atime it could've been different. She had something working for her, she had them interested, she could'vereally rolled. But when you walk out on a thing like that, you don't walk back. Ask Luise Rainer. AndRainer was a star. Sure, Holly was no star; she never got out of the still department. But that was beforeThe Story of Dr. Wassell . Then she could've really rolled. I know, see, cause I'm the guy was giving herthe push." He pointed his cigar at himself. "O.J. Berman."
　　He expected recognition, and I didn't mind obliging him, it was all right by me, except I'd never heard of
　　O.J. Berman. It developed that he was a Hollywood actor's agent."I'm the first one saw her. Out at Santa Anita. She's hanging around the track every day. I'm interested:professionally. I find out she's some jock's regular, she's living with the shrimp. I get the jock told Drop It
　　if he don't want conversation with the vice boys: see, the kid's fifteen. But stylish: she's okay, she comesacross. Even when she's wearing glassesthis thick; even when she opens her mouth and you don't knowif she's a hillbilly or an Okie or what. I still don't. My guess, nobody'll ever know where she came from.She's such a goddamn liar, maybe she don't know herself any more. But it took us a year to smooth outthat accent. How we did it finally, we gave her French lessons: after she could imitate French, it wasn't solong she could imitate English. We modeled her along the Margaret Sullavan type, but she could pitchsome curves of her own, people were interested, big ones, and to top it all, Benny Polan, a respectedguy, Benny wants to marry her. An agent could ask for more? Then wham!The Story of Dr. Wassell .You see that picture? Cecil B. DeMille. Gary Cooper. Jesus. I kill myself, it's all set: they're going to testher for the part of Dr. Wassell's nurse. One of his nurses, anyway. Then wham! The phone rings." Hepicked a telephone out of the air and held it to his ear. "She says, this is Holly, I say honey, you sound faraway, she says I'm in New York, I say what the hell are you doing in New York when it's Sunday andyou got the test tomorrow? She says I'm in New York cause I've never been to New York. I say getyour ass on a plane and get back here, she says I don't want it. I say what's your angle, doll? She saysyou got to want it to be good and I don't want it, I say well, what the hell do you want, and she sayswhen I find out you'll be the first to know. See what I mean: horseshit on a platter."
　　if he don't want conversation with the vice boys: see, the kid's fifteen. But stylish: she's okay, she comesacross. Even when she's wearing glassesthis thick; even when she opens her mouth and you don't knowif she's a hillbilly or an Okie or what. I still don't. My guess, nobody'll ever know where she came from.She's such a goddamn liar, maybe she don't know herself any more. But it took us a year to smooth outthat accent. How we did it finally, we gave her French lessons: after she could imitate French, it wasn't solong she could imitate English. We modeled her along the Margaret Sullavan type, but she could pitchsome curves of her own, people were interested, big ones, and to top it all, Benny Polan, a respectedguy, Benny wants to marry her. An agent could ask for more? Then wham!The Story of Dr. Wassell .You see that picture? Cecil B. DeMille. Gary Cooper. Jesus. I kill myself, it's all set: they're going to testher for the part of Dr. Wassell's nurse. One of his nurses, anyway. Then wham! The phone rings." Hepicked a telephone out of the air and held it to his ear. "She says, this is Holly, I say honey, you sound faraway, she says I'm in New York, I say what the hell are you doing in New York when it's Sunday andyou got the test tomorrow? She says I'm in New York cause I've never been to New York. I say getyour ass on a plane and get back here, she says I don't want it. I say what's your angle, doll? She saysyou got to want it to be good and I don't want it, I say well, what the hell do you want, and she sayswhen I find out you'll be the first to know. See what I mean: horseshit on a platter."
　　"Thisis what she wants?" he said, flinging out his arms. "A lot of characters they aren't expected? Livingoff tips. Running around with bums. So maybe she could marry Rusty Trawler? You should pin a medalon her for that?"
　　He waited, glaring.
　　"Sorry, I don't know him."
　　"You don't know Rusty Trawler, you can't know much about the kid. Bad deal," he said, his tongueclucking in his huge head. "I was hoping you maybe had influence. Could level with the kid before it's toolate."
　　"But according to you, it already is."
　　He blew a smoke ring, let it fade before he smiled; the smile altered his face, made something gentlehappen. "I could get it rolling again. Like I told you," he said, and now it sounded true, "I sincerely likethe kid."
　　"What scandals are you spreading, O.J.?" Holly splashed into the room, a towel more or less wrappedround her and her wet feet dripping footmarks on the floor.
　　"Just the usual. That you're nuts.
　　"Fred knows that already."
　　"But you don't."
　　"Light me a cigarette, darling," she said, snatching off a bathing cap and shaking her hair. "I don't meanyou, O.J. You're such a slob. You always nigger-lip."
　　She scooped up the cat and swung him onto her shoulder. He perched there with the balance of a bird,his paws tangled in her hair as if it were knitting yarn; and yet, despite these amiable antics, it was a grimcat with a pirate's cutthroat face; one eye was gluey-blind, the other sparkled with dark deeds.
　　She scooped up the cat and swung him onto her shoulder. He perched there with the balance of a bird,his paws tangled in her hair as if it were knitting yarn; and yet, despite these amiable antics, it was a grimcat with a pirate's cutthroat face; one eye was gluey-blind, the other sparkled with dark deeds.
　　"Lay off."
　　"It's not a joke, darling. I want you to call him up and tell him what a genius Fred is. He's written barrelsof the most marvelous stories. Well, don't blush, Fred: you didn't say you were a genius, I did. Come on,
　　O.J. What are you going to do to make Fred rich?""Suppose you let me settle that with Fred."
　　"Remember," she said, leaving us, "I'm his agent. Another thing: if I holler, come zipper me up. And ifanybody knocks, let them in."
　　A multitude did. Within the next quarter-hour a stag party had taken over the apartment, several of themin uniform. I counted two Naval officers and an Air Force colonel; but they were outnumbered bygraying arrivals beyond draft status. Except for a lack of youth, the guests had no common theme, theyseemed strangers among strangers; indeed, each face, on entering, had struggled to conceal dismay atseeing others there. It was as if the hostess had distributed her invitations while zigzagging through variousbars; which was probably the case. After the initial frowns, however, they mixed without grumbling,especially O.J. Berman, who avidly exploited the new company to avoid discussing my Hollywoodfuture. I was left abandoned by the bookshelves; of the books there, more than half were about horses,the rest baseball. Pretending an interest inHorseflesh and How to Tell It gave me sufficiently privateopportunity for sizing Holly's friends.
　　Presently one of these became prominent. He was a middle-aged child that had never shed its baby fat,though some gifted tailor had almost succeeded in camouflaging his plump and spankable bottom. Therewasn't a suspicion of bone in his body; his face, a zero filled in with pretty miniature features, had anunused, a virginal quality: it was as if he'd been born, then expanded, his skin remaining unlined as ablown-up balloon, and his mouth, though ready for squalls and tantrums, a spoiled sweet puckering. Butit was not appearance that singled him out; preserved infants aren't all that rare. It was, rather, hisconduct; for he was behaving as though the party were his: like an energetic octopus, he was shakingmartinis, making introductions, manipulating the phonograph. In fairness, most of his activities weredictated by the hostess herself:Rusty, would you mind; Rusty, would you please . If he was in love withher, then clearly he had his jealousy in check. A jealous man might have lost control, watching her as sheskimmed around the room, carrying her cat in one hand but leaving the other free to straighten a tie orremove lapel lint; the Air Force colonel wore a medal that came in for quite a polish.
　　The man's name was Rutherfurd ("Rusty") Trawler. In 1908 he'd lost both his parents, his father thevictim of an anarchist and his mother of shock, which double misfortune had made Rusty an orphan, amillionaire, and a celebrity, all at the age of five. He'd been a stand-by of the Sunday supplements eversince, a consequence that had gathered hurricane momentum when, still a schoolboy, he had caused hisgodfather-custodian to be arrested on charges of sodomy. After that, marriage and divorce sustained hisplace in the tabloid-sun. His first wife had taken herself, and her alimony, to a rival of Father Divine's.The second wife seems unaccounted for, but the third had sued him in New York State with a full satchelof the kind of testimony that entails. He himself divorced the last Mrs. Trawler, his principal complaintstating that she'd started a mutiny aboard his yacht, said mutiny resulting in his being deposited on the Dry
　　Tortugas. Though he'd been a bachelor since, apparently before the war he'd proposed to Unity Mitford,at least he was supposed to have sent her a cable offering to marry her if Hitler didn't. This was said tobe the reason Winchell always referred to him as a Nazi; that, and the fact that he attended rallies inYorkville.
　　Tortugas. Though he'd been a bachelor since, apparently before the war he'd proposed to Unity Mitford,at least he was supposed to have sent her a cable offering to marry her if Hitler didn't. This was said tobe the reason Winchell always referred to him as a Nazi; that, and the fact that he attended rallies inYorkville.
　　"Admiring my publicity, or are you just a baseball fan?" she said, adjusting her dark glasses as sheglanced over my shoulder.
　　I said, "What was this week's weather report?"
　　She winked at me, but it was humorless: a wink of warning, "I'm all for horses, but I loathe baseball," shesaid, and the sub-message in her, voice was saying she wished me to forget she'd ever mentioned SallyTomato. "I hate the sound of it on a radio, but I have to listen, it's part of my research. There're so fewthings men can talk about. If a man doesn't like baseball, then he must like horses, and if he doesn't likeeither of them, well, I'm in trouble anyway: he don't like girls. And how are you making out with O.J.?"
　　"We've separated by mutual agreement"
　　"He's an opportunity, believe me."
　　"I do believe you. But what have I to offer that would strike him as an opportunity?"
　　She persisted. "Go over there and make him think he isn't funny-looking. He really can help you, Fred."
　　"I understand you weren't too appreciative." She seemed puzzled until I said:"The Story of DoctorWassell"
　　"He's still harping?" she said, and cast across the room an affectionate look at Berman. "But he's got apoint, Ishould feel guilty. Not because they would have given me the part or because I would have beengood: they wouldn't and I wouldn't. If I do feel guilty, I guess it's because I let him go on dreaming when Iwasn't dreaming a bit. I was just vamping for time to make a few self-improvements: I knew damn wellI'd never be a movie star. It's too hard; and if you're intelligent, it's too embarrassing. My complexesaren't inferior enough: being a movie star and having a big fat ego are supposed to go hand-in-hand;actually, it's essential not to have any ego at all. I don't mean I'd mind being rich and famous.
　　That's very much on my schedule, and someday I'll try to get around to it; but if it happens, I'd like tohave my ego tagging along. I want to still be me when I wake up one fine morning and have breakfast atTiffany's. You need a glass," she said, noticing my empty hands. "Rusty! Will you bring my friend adrink?"
　　She was still hugging the cat. "Poor slob," she said, tickling his head, "poor slob without a name. It's alittle inconvenient, his not having a name. But I haven't any right to give him one: he'll have to wait until hebelongs to somebody. We just sort of took up by the river one day, we don't belong to each other: he'san independent, and so am I. I don't want to own anything until I know I've found the place where meand things belong together. I'm not quite sure where that is just yet. But I know what it's like." She
　　smiled, and let the cat drop to the floor. "It's like Tiffany's," she said. "Not that I give a hoot aboutjewelry. Diamonds, yes. But it's tacky to wear diamonds before you're forty; and even that's risky. Theyonly look right on the really old girls. Maria Ouspenskaya. Wrinkles and bones, white hair and diamonds:I can't wait. But that's not why I'm mad about Tiffany's. Listen. You know those days when you've gotthe mean reds?"
　　smiled, and let the cat drop to the floor. "It's like Tiffany's," she said. "Not that I give a hoot aboutjewelry. Diamonds, yes. But it's tacky to wear diamonds before you're forty; and even that's risky. Theyonly look right on the really old girls. Maria Ouspenskaya. Wrinkles and bones, white hair and diamonds:I can't wait. But that's not why I'm mad about Tiffany's. Listen. You know those days when you've gotthe mean reds?"
　　"No," she said slowly. "No, the blues are because you're getting fat or maybe it's been raining too long.You're sad, that's all. But the mean reds are horrible. You're afraid and you sweat like hell, but you don'tknow what you're afraid of. Except something bad is going to happen, only you don't know what it is.You've had that feeling?"
　　"Quite often. Some people call itangst ."
　　"All right.Angst . But what do you do about it?"
　　"Well, a drink helps."
　　"I've tried that. I've tried aspirin, too. Rusty thinks I should smoke marijuana, and I did for a while, but itonly makes me giggle. What I've found does the most good is just to get into a taxi and go to Tiffany's. Itcalms me down right away, the quietness and the proud look of it; nothing very bad could happen to youthere, not with those kind men in their nice suits, and that lovely smell of silver and alligator wallets. If Icould find a real-life place that made me feel like Tiffany's, then I'd buy some furniture and give the cat aname. I've thought maybe after the war, Fred and I -- " She pushed up her dark glasses, and her eyes,the differing colors of them, the grays and wisps of blue and green, had taken on a far-seeing sharpness."I went to Mexico once. It's wonderful country for raising horses. I saw one place near the sea. Fred'sgood with horses."
　　Rusty Trawler came carrying a martini; he handed it over without looking at me. "I'm hungry," heannounced, and his voice, retarded as the rest of him, produced an unnerving brat-whine that seemed toblame Holly. "It's seven-thirty, and I'm hungry. You know what the doctor said."
　　"Yes, Rusty. I know what the doctor said."
　　"Well, then break it up. Let's go."
　　"I want you to behave, Rusty." She spoke softly, but there was a governess threat of punishment in hertone that caused an odd flush of pleasure, of gratitude, to pink his face.
　　"You don't love me," he complained, as though they were alone.'
　　"Nobody loves naughtiness."
　　Obviously she'd said what he wanted to hear; it appeared to both excite and relax him. Still hecontinued, as though it were a ritual: "Do you love me?"
　　She patted him. "Tend to your chores, Rusty. And when I'm ready, we'll go eat wherever you want."
　　"Chinatown?"
　　"But that doesn't mean sweet and sour spareribs. You know what the doctor said."As he returned to his duties with a satisfied waddle, I couldn't resist reminding her that she hadn't
　　answered his question. "Doyou love him?""I told you: you can make yourself love anybody. Besides, he had a stinking childhood.""If it was so stinking, why does he cling to it?""Use your head. Can't you see it's just that Rusty feels safer in diapers than he would in a skirt? Which is
　　really the choice, only he's awfully touchy about it. He tried to stab me with a butter knife because I toldhim to grow up and face the issue, settle down and play house with a nice fatherly truck driver.Meantime, I've got him on my hands; which is okay, he's harmless, he thinks girls are dolls, literally."
　　"Thank God.""Well, if it were true of most men, I'd hardly be thanking God.""I meant thank God you're not going to marry Mr. Trawler."She lifted an eyebrow. "By the way, I'm not pretending I don't know he's rich. Even land in Mexico
　　costs something. Now," she said, motioning me forward, "let's get hold of O.J."I held back while my mind worked to win a postponement. Then I remembered: "WhyTraveling ?""On my card?" she said, disconcerted. "You think it's funny?""Not funny. Just provocative."She shrugged. "After all, how do I know where I'll be living tomorrow? So I told them to putTraveling .
　　Anyway, it was a waste of money, ordering those cards. Except I felt I owed it to them to buy some littlesome thing. They're from Tiffany's." She reached for my martini, I hadn't touched it; she drained it in twoswallows, and took my hand. "Quit stalling. You're going to make friends with O.J."
　　An occurrence at the door intervened. It was a young woman, and she entered like a wind-rush, a squallof scarves and jangling gold. "H-H-Holly," she said, wagging a finger as she advanced, "you miserableh-h-hoarder. Hogging all these simply r-r-riveting m-m-men!"
　　She was well over six feet, taller than most men there. They straightened their spines, sucked in theirstomachs; there was a general contest to match her swaying height.
　　Holly said, "What are you doing here?" and her lips were taut as drawn string."Why, n-n-nothing, sugar. I've been upstairs working with Yunioshi. Christmas stuff for theBa-ba-zaar .But you sound vexed, sugar?" She scattered a roundabout smile. "You b-b-boys not vexed at me forbutting in on your p-p-party?"
　　Rusty Trawler tittered. He squeezed her arm, as though to admire her muscle, and asked her if she coulduse a drink."I surely could," she said. "Make mine bourbon."
　　Holly told her, "Thereisn't any." Whereupon the Air Force colonel suggested he run out for a bottle.
　　Holly told her, "Thereisn't any." Whereupon the Air Force colonel suggested he run out for a bottle.
　　It seemed a dance, Berman performing some fancy footwork to prevent his rivals cutting in. He lost herto a quadrille of partners who gobbled up her stammered jokes like popcorn tossed to pigeons. It was acomprehensible success. She was a triumph over ugliness, so often more beguiling than real beauty, ifonly because it contains paradox. In this case, as opposed to the scrupulous method of plain good tasteand scientific grooming, the trick had been worked by exaggerating defects; she'd made them ornamentalby admitting them boldly. Heels that emphasized her height, so steep her ankles trembled; a flat tightbodice that indicated she could go to a beach in bathing trunks; hair that was pulled straight back,accentuating the spareness, the starvation of her fashion-model face. Even the stutter, certainly genuinebut still a bit laid on, had been turned to advantage. It was the master stroke, that stutter; for it contrivedto make her banalities sound somehow original, and secondly, despite her tallness, her assurance, itserved to inspire in male listeners a protective feeling. To illustrate: Berman had to be pounded on theback because she said, "Who can tell me w-w-where is the j-j-john?"; then, completing the cycle, heoffered an arm to guide her himself.
　　"That," said Holly, "won't be necessary. She's been here before. She knows where it is." She wasemptying ashtrays, and after Mag Wildwood had left the room, she emptied another, then said, sighedrather: "It's really very sad." She paused long enough to calculate the number of inquiring expressions; itwas sufficient. "And so mysterious. You'd think it would show more. But heaven knows, shelookshealthy. So, well,clean . That's the extraordinary part. Wouldn't you," she asked with concern, but of noone in particular, "wouldn't you say shelooked clean?"
　　Someone coughed, several swallowed. A Naval officer, who had been holding Mag Wildwood's drink,put it down.
　　"But then," said Holly, "I hear so many of these Southern girls have the same trouble." She shuddereddelicately, and went to the kitchen for more ice.
　　Mag Wildwood couldn't understand it, the abrupt absence of warmth on her return; the conversationsshe began behaved like green logs, they fumed but would not fire. More unforgivably, people wereleaving without taking her telephone number. The Air Force colonel decamped while her back wasturned, and this was the straw too much: he'd asked her to dinner. Suddenly she was blind. And since ginto artifice bears the same relation as tears to mascara, her attractions at once dissembled. She took it outon everyone. She called her hostess a Hollywood degenerate. She invited a man in his fifties to fight. Shetold Berman, Hitler was right. She exhilarated Rusty Trawler by stiff-arming him into a corner. "Youknow what's going to happen to you?" she said, with no hint of a stutter. "I'm going to march you over tothe zoo and feed you to the yak." He looked altogether willing, but she disappointed him by sliding to thefloor, where she sat humming.
　　"You're a bore. Get up from there," Holly said, stretching on a pair of gloves. The remnants of the partywere waiting at the door, and when the bore didn't budge Holly cast me an apologetic glance. "Be anangel, would you, Fred? Put her in a taxi. She lives at the Winslow."
　　"Don't. Live Barbizon. Regent 4-5700. Ask for Mag Wildwood."
　　"Youare an angel, Fred."
　　"Youare an angel, Fred."
　　The following afternoon I collided with Holly on the stairs. "You" she said, hurrying past with a packagefrom the druggist. "There she is, on the verge of pneumonia. A hang-over out to here. And the mean redson top of it." I gathered from this that Mag Wildwood was still in the apartment, but she gave me nochance to explore her surprising sympathy. Over the weekend, mystery deepened. First, there was theLatin who came to my door: mistakenly, for he was inquiring after Miss Wildwood. It took a while tocorrect his error, our accents seemed mutually incoherent, but by the time we had I was charmed. He'dbeen put together with care, his brown head and bullfighter's figure had an exactness, a perfection, like anapple, an orange, something nature has made just right. Added to this, as decoration, were an English suitand a brisk cologne and, what is still more unlatin, a bashful manner. The second event of the dayinvolved him again. It was toward evening, and I saw him on my way out to dinner. He was arriving in ataxi; the driver helped him totter into the house with a load of suitcases. That gave me something to chewon: by Sunday my jaws were quite tired.
　　Then the picture became both darker and clearer.
　　Sunday was an Indian summer day, the sun was strong, my window was open, and I heard voices onthe fire escape. Holly and Mag were sprawled there on a blanket, the cat between them. Their hair,newly washed, hung lankly. They were busy, Holly varnishing her toenails, Mag knitting on a sweater.Mag was speaking.
　　"If you ask me, I think you're l-l-lucky. At least there's one thing you can say for Rusty. He's anAmerican."
　　"Bully for him."
　　"Sugar. There's a war on."
　　"And when it's over, you've seen the last of me, boy."
　　"I don't feel that way. I'm p-p-proud of my country. The men in my family were great soldiers. There's astatue of Papadaddy Wildwood smack in the center of Wildwood."
　　"Fred's a soldier," said Holly. "But I doubt if he'll ever be a statue. Could be. They say the more stupidyou are the braver. He's pretty stupid."
　　"Fred's that boy upstairs? I didn't realize he was a soldier. But hedoes look stupid."
　　"Yearning. Not stupid. He wants awfully to be on the inside staring out: anybody with their nose pressedagainst a glass is liable to look stupid. Anyhow, he's a different Fred. Fred's my brother."
　　"You call your own f-f-flesh and b-b-blood stupid?"
　　"You call your own f-f-flesh and b-b-blood stupid?"
　　"Well, it's poor taste to say so. A boy that's fighting for you and me and all of us."
　　"What is this: a bond rally?"
　　"I just want you to know where I stand. I appreciate a joke, but underneath I'm a s-s-serious person.Proud to be an American. That's why I'm sorry about Jos└." She put down her knitting needles. "Youdothink he's terribly good-looking, don't you?" Holly said Hmn, and swiped the cat's whiskers with herlacquer brush. "If only I could get used to the idea of m-m-marrying a Brazilian. Andbeing aB-b-brazilian myself. It's such a canyon to cross. Six thousand miles, and not knowing the language -- "
　　"Go to Berlitz."
　　"Why on earth would they be teaching P-p-portu-guese? It isn't as though anyone spoke it. No, my onlychance is to try and make Jos└ forget politics and become an American. It's such a useless thing for aman to want to be: the p-p-president ofBrazil ." She sighed and picked up her knitting. "I must be madly
　　in love. You saw us together. Do you think I'm madly in love?"
　　"Well. Does he bite?"
　　Mag dropped a stitch. "Bite?"
　　"You. In bed."
　　"Why, no.Should he?" Then she added, censoriously: "But he does laugh."
　　"Good. That's the right spirit. I like a man who sees the humor; most of them, they're all pant and puff."
　　Mag withdrew her complaint; she accepted the comment as flattery reflecting on herself. "Yes. I
　　suppose."
　　"Okay. He doesn't bite. He laughs. What else?"
　　Mag counted up her dropped stitch and began again, knit, purl, purl.
　　"I said -- "
　　"I heard you. And it isn't that I don't want to tell you. But it's so difficult to remember. I don't d-d-dwell
　　on these things. The way you seem to. They go out of my head like a dream. I'm sure that's then-n-normal attitude."
　　"It may be normal, darling; but I'd rather be natural." Holly paused in the process of reddening the rest ofthe cat's whiskers. "Listen. If you can't remember, try leaving the lights on."
　　"Please understand me, Holly. I'm a very-very-veryconventional person."
　　"Oh, balls. What's wrong with a decent look at a guy you like? Men are beautiful, a lot of them are, Jos└is, and if you don't even want tolook at him, well, I'd say he's getting a pretty cold plate of macaroni."
　　"L-l-lower your voice."
　　"L-l-lower your voice."
　　"No. Because I'm not a cold plate of m-m-macaroni. I'm a warm-hearted person. It's the basis of mycharacter."
　　"Okay. You've got a warm heart. But if I were a man on my way to bed, I'd rather take along ahot-water bottle. It's more tangible."
　　"You won't hear any squawks out of Jos└," she said complacently, her needles flashing in the sunlight."What's more, Iam in love with him. Do you realize I've knitted ten pairs of Argyles in less than threemonths? And this is the second sweater." She stretched the sweater and tossed it aside. "What's thepoint, though? Sweaters in Brazil. I ought to be making s-s-sun helmets."
　　Holly lay back and yawned. "It must be winter sometime."
　　"Itrains , that I know. Heat. Rain. J-j-jungles."
　　"Heat. Jungles. Actually, I'd like that."
　　"Better you than me."
　　"Yes," said Holly, with a sleepiness that was not sleepy. "Better me than you."
　　On Monday, when I went down for the morning mail, the card on Holly's box had been altered, a nameadded: Miss Golightly and Miss Wildwood were now traveling together. This might have held my interestlonger except for a letter in my own mailbox. It was from a small university review to whom I'd sent astory. They liked it; and, though I must understand they could not afford to pay, they intended to publish.Publish: that meantprint . Dizzy with excitement is no mere phrase. I had to tell someone: and, taking thestairs two at a time, I pounded on Holly's door.
　　I didn't trust my voice to tell the news; as soon as she came to the door, her eyes squinty with sleep, Ithrust the letter at her. It seemed as though she'd had time to read sixty pages before she handed it back."I wouldn't let them do it, not if they don't pay you," she said, yawning. Perhaps my face explained she'dmisconstrued, that I'd not wanted advice but congratulations: her mouth shifted from a yawn into a smile."Oh, I see. It's wonderful. Well, come in," she said. "Well make a pot of coffee and celebrate. No. I'll getdressed and take you to lunch."
　　Her bedroom was consistent with her parlor: it perpetuated the same camping-out atmosphere; cratesand suitcases, everything packed and ready to go, like the belongings of a criminal who feels the law notfar behind. In the parlor there was no conventional furniture, but the bedroom had the bed itself, a doubleone at that, and quite flashy: blond wood, tufted satin.
　　She left the door of the bathroom open, and conversed from there; between the flushing and thebrushing, most of what she said was unintelligible, but the gist of it was: shesupposed I knew MagWildwood had moved in and wasn't thatconvenient ? because if you're going tohave a roommate, andsheisn't a dyke, then the next best thing is aperfect fool, which Magwas , because then you can dump
　　the lease on themand send them out for the laundry.
　　the lease on themand send them out for the laundry.
　　" -- and you know, she's quite a successful model: isn't thatfantastic ! But a good thing," she said,hobbling out of the bathroom as she adjusted a garter. "It ought to keep her out of my hair most of theday. And there shouldn't be too much trouble on the man front. She's engaged. Nice guy, too. Thoughthere's a tiny difference in height: I'd say a foot, her favor. Where the hell -- " She was on her kneespoking under the bed. After she'd found what she was looking for, a pair of lizard shoes, she had tosearch for a blouse, a belt, and it was a subject to ponder, how, from such wreckage, she evolved theeventual effect: pampered, calmly immaculate, as though she'd been attended by Cleopatra's maids. Shesaid, "Listen," and cupped her hand under my chin, "I'm glad about the story. Really I am."
　　That Monday in October, 1943. A beautiful day with the buoyancy of a bird. To start, we hadManhattans at Joe Bell's; and, when he heard of my good luck, champagne cocktails on the house. Later,we wandered toward Fifth Avenue, where there was a parade. The flags in the wind, the thump ofmilitary bands and military feet, seemed to have nothing to do with war, but to be, rather, a fanfarearranged in my personal honor.
　　We ate lunch at the cafeteria in the park. Afterwards, avoiding the zoo (Holly said she couldn't bear tosee anything in a cage), we giggled, ran, sang along the paths toward the old wooden boathouse, nowgone. Leaves floated on the lake; on the shore, a park-man was fanning a bonfire of them, and thesmoke, rising like Indian signals, was the only smudge on the quivering air. Aprils have never meant muchto me, autumns seem that season of beginning, spring; which is how I felt sitting with Holly on the railingsof the boathouse porch. I thought of the future, and spoke of the past. Because Holly wanted to knowabout my childhood. She talked of her own, too; but it was elusive, nameless, placeless, animpressionistic recital, though the impression received was contrary to what one expected, for she gavean almost voluptuous account of swimming and summer, Christmas trees, pretty cousins and parties: inshort, happy in a way that she was not, and never, certainly, the background of a child who had runaway.
　　Or, I asked, wasn't it true that she'd been out on her own since she was fourteen? She rubbed her nose."That's true. The other isn't. But really, darling, you made such a tragedy out ofyour childhood I didn'tfeel I should compete."
　　She hopped off the railing. "Anyway, it reminds me: I ought to send Fred some peanut butter." The restof the afternoon we were east and west worming out of reluctant grocers cans of peanut butter, awartime scarcity; dark came before we'd rounded up a half-dozen jars, the last at a delicatessen on ThirdAvenue. It was near the antique shop with the palace of a bird cage in its window, so I took her there tosee it, and she enjoyed the point, its fantasy: "But still, it's a cage."
　　Passing a Woolworth's, she gripped my arm: "Let's steal something," she said, pulling me into the store,where at once there seemed a pressure of eyes, as though we were already under suspicion. "Come on.Don't be chicken." She scouted a counter piled with paper pumpkins and Halloween masks. Thesaleslady was occupied with a group of nuns who were trying on masks. Holly picked up a mask andslipped it over her face; she chose another and put it on mine; then she took my hand and we walkedaway. It was as simple as that. Outside, we ran a few blocks, I think to make it more dramatic; but alsobecause, as I'd discovered, successful theft exhilarates. I wondered if she'd often stolen. "I used to," shesaid. "I mean I had to. If I wanted anything. But I still do it every now and then, sort of to keep my hand
　　in." We wore the masks all the way home.
　　in." We wore the masks all the way home.
　　Late one afternoon, while waiting for a Fifth Avenue bus, I noticed a taxi stop across the street to let outa girl who ran up the steps of the Forty-second Street public library. She was through the doors before Irecognized her, which was pardonable, for Holly and libraries were not an easy association to make. I letcuriosity guide me between the lions, debating on the way whether I should admit following her orpretend coincidence. In the end I did neither, but concealed myself some tables away from her in thegeneral reading room, where she sat behind her dark glasses and a fortress of literature she'd gathered atthe desk. She sped from one book to the next, intermittently lingering on a page, always with a frown, asif it were printed upside down. She had a pencil poised above paper -- nothing seemed to catch herfancy, still now and then, as though for the hell of it, she made laborious scribblings. Watching her, Iremembered a girl I'd known in school, a grind, Mildred Grossman. Mildred: with her moist hair andgreasy spectacles, her stained fingers that dissected frogs and carried coffee to picket lines, her flat eyesthat only turned toward the stars to estimate their chemical tonnage. Earth and air could not be moreopposite than Mildred and Holly, yet in my head they acquired a Siamese twinship, and the thread ofthought that had sewn them together ran like this: the average personality reshapes frequently, every fewyears even our bodies undergo a complete overhaul -- desirable or not, it is a natural thing that we shouldchange. All right, here were two people who never would. That is what Mildred Grossman had incommon with Holly Golightly. They would never change because they'd been given their character toosoon; which, like sudden riches, leads to a lack of proportion: the one had splurged herself into atop-heavy realist, the other a lopsided romantic. I imagined them in a restaurant of the future, Mildred stillstudying the menu for its nutritional values, Holly still gluttonous for everything on it. It would never bedifferent. They would walk through life and out of it with the same determined step that took small noticeof those cliffs at the left. Such profound observations made me forget where I was; I came to, startled tofind myself in the gloom of the library, and surprised all over again to see Holly there. It was after seven,she was freshening her lipstick and perking up her appearance from what she deemed correct for alibrary to what, by adding a bit of scarf, some earrings, she considered suitable for the Colony. Whenshe'd left, I wandered over to the table where her books remained; they were what I had wanted to see.South by Thunderbird. Byways of Brazil. The Political Mind of Latin America . And so forth.
　　On Christmas Eve she and Mag gave a party. Holly asked me to come early and help trim the tree. I'm
　　still not sure how they maneuvered that tree into the apartment. The top branches were crushed againstthe ceiling, the lower ones spread wall-to-wall; altogether it was not unlike the yuletide giant we see inRockefeller Plaza. Moreover, it would have taken a Rockefeller to decorate it, for it soaked up baublesand tinsel like melting snow. Holly suggested she run out to Woolworth's and steal some balloons; shedid: and they turned the tree into a fairly good show. We made a toast to our work, and Holly said:"Look in the bedroom. There's a present for you."
　　still not sure how they maneuvered that tree into the apartment. The top branches were crushed againstthe ceiling, the lower ones spread wall-to-wall; altogether it was not unlike the yuletide giant we see inRockefeller Plaza. Moreover, it would have taken a Rockefeller to decorate it, for it soaked up baublesand tinsel like melting snow. Holly suggested she run out to Woolworth's and steal some balloons; shedid: and they turned the tree into a fairly good show. We made a toast to our work, and Holly said:"Look in the bedroom. There's a present for you."
　　"I couldn't agree more; but I thought you wanted it."
　　"The money! Three hundred and fifty dollars!"
　　She shrugged. "A few extra trips to the powder room. Promise me, though. Promise you'll never put aliving thing in it."
　　I started to kiss her, but she held out her hand "Gimme," she said, tapping the bulge in my pocket.
　　"I'm afraid it isn't much," and it wasn't: a St. Christopher's medal. But at least it came from Tiffany's.Holly was not a girl who could keep anything, and surely by now she has lost that medal, left it in asuitcase or some hotel drawer. But the bird cage is still mine. I've lugged it to New Orleans, Nantucket,all over Europe, Morocco, the West Indies. Yet I seldom remember that it was Holly who gave it to me,because at one point I chose to forget: we had a big falling-out, and among the objects rotating in the eyeof our hurricane were the bird cage and O.J. Berman and my story, a copy of which I'd given Holly whenit appeared in the university review.
　　Sometime in February, Holly had gone on a winter trip with Rusty, Mag and Jos└ Ybarra-Jaegar. Ouraltercation happened soon after she returned. She was brown as iodine, her hair was sun-bleached to aghost-color, she'd had a wonderful time: "Well, first of all we were in Key West, and Rusty got mad atsome sailors, or vice versa,anyway he'll have to wear a spine brace the rest of his life. Dearest Magended up in the hospital, too. First-degree sunburn. Disgusting: all blisters and citronella. We couldn'tstand the smell of her. So Jos└ and I left them in the hospital and went to Havana. He says wait till I seeRio; but as far as I'm concerned Havana can take my money right now. We had an irresistible guide,most of him Negro and the rest of him Chinese, and while I don't go much for one or the other, thecombination was fairly riveting: so I let him play kneesie under the table, because frankly I didn't find himat all banal; but then one night he took us to a blue movie, and what do you suppose? Therehe wason thescreen. Of course when we got back to Key West, Mag was positive I'd spent the whole time sleepingwith Jos└. So was Rusty: but he doesn't care about that, he simply wants to hear the details. Actually,things were pretty tense until I had a heart-to-heart with Mag."
　　We were in the front room, where, though it was now nearly March, the enormous Christmas tree,turned brown and scentless, its balloons shriveled as an old cow's dugs, still occupied most of the space.A recognizable piece of furniture had been added to the room: an army cot; and Holly, trying to preserveher tropic look, was sprawled on it under a sun lamp.
　　"And you convinced her?"
　　"That I hadn't slept with Jos└? God, yes. I simply told -- but you know: made it sound like anag onizedconfession -- simply told her I was a dyke."
　　"She couldn't have believed that."
　　"She couldn't have believed that."
　　wrong track. Negroes and children: who cares?"
　　"Not Mr. Berman, I gather."
　　"Well, I agree with him. I read that story twice. Brats and niggers. Trembling leaves.Description . It
　　doesn'tmean anything."My hand, smoothing oil on her skin, seemed to have a temper of its own: it yearned to raise itself and
　　come down on her buttocks. "Give me an example," I said quietly. "Of something that means something.In your opinion."
　　"Wuthering Heights," she said, without hesitation.
　　The urge in my hand was growing beyond control. "But that's unreasonable. You're talking about a work
　　of genius."
　　"It was, wasn't it?My wild sweet Cathy . God, I cried buckets. I saw it ten times."
　　I said, "Oh" with recognizable relief, "oh" with a shameful, rising inflection, "themovie ."
　　Her muscles hardened, the touch of her was like stone warmed by the sun. "Everybody has to feel
　　superior to somebody," she said. "But it's customary to present a little proof before you take theprivilege."
　　"I don't compare myself to you. Or, Berman. Therefore I can't feel superior. We want different things."
　　"Don't you want to make money?"
　　"I haven't planned that far."
　　"That's how your stories sound. As though you'd written them without knowing the end. Well, I'll tellyou: I you'd better make money. You have an expensive imagination. Not many people are going to buyyou bird cages."
　　"Sorry."
　　"You will be if you hit me. You wanted to a minute ago: I could feel it in your hand; and you want tonow."
　　I did, terribly; my hand, my heart was shaking as I recapped the bottle of oil. "Oh no, I wouldn't regretthat. I'm only sorry you wasted your money on me: Rusty Trawler is too hard a way of earning it."
　　She sat up on the army cot, her face, her naked breasts coldly blue in the sun-lamp light. "It should takeyou about four seconds to walk from here to the door. I'll give you two."
　　I went straight upstairs, got the bird cage, took it down and left it in front of her door. That settled that.Or so I imagined until the next morning when, as I was leaving for work, I saw the cage perched on asidewalk ash-can waiting for the garbage collector. Rather sheepishly, I rescued it and carried it back tomy room, a capitulation that did not lessen my resolve to put Holly Golightly absolutely out of my life. Shewas, I decided, "a crude exhibitionist," "a time waster," "an utter fake": someone never to be spoken toagain.
　　I went straight upstairs, got the bird cage, took it down and left it in front of her door. That settled that.Or so I imagined until the next morning when, as I was leaving for work, I saw the cage perched on asidewalk ash-can waiting for the garbage collector. Rather sheepishly, I rescued it and carried it back tomy room, a capitulation that did not lessen my resolve to put Holly Golightly absolutely out of my life. Shewas, I decided, "a crude exhibitionist," "a time waster," "an utter fake": someone never to be spoken toagain.
　　It was no novelty to encounter suspicious specimens among Holly's callers, quite the contrary; but oneday late that spring, while passing through the brownstone's vestibule, I noticed avery provocative manexamining her mailbox. A person in his early fifties with a hard, weathered face, gray forlorn eyes. Hewore an old sweat-stained gray hat, and his cheap summer suit, a pale blue, hung too loosely on his lankyframe; his shoes were brown and brandnew. He seemed to have no intention of ringing Holly's bell.Slowly, as though he were reading Braille, he kept rubbing a finger across the embossed lettering of hername.
　　That evening, on my way to supper, I saw the man again. He was standing across the street, leaningagainst a tree and staring up at Holly's windows. Sinister speculations rushed through my head. Was he adetective? Or some underworld agent connected with her Sing Sing friend, Sally Tomato? The situationrevived my tenderer feelings for Holly; it was only fair to interrupt our feud long enough to warn her thatshe was being watched. As I walked to the corner, heading east toward the Hamburg Heaven atSeventy-ninth and Madison, I could feel the man's attention focused on me. Presently, without turning myhead, I knew that he was following me. Because I could hear him whistling. Not any ordinary tune, butthe plaintive, prairie melody Holly sometimes played on her guitar:Don't wanna sleep, don't wanna die,just wanna go a-travelin' through the pastures of the sky . The whistling continued across ParkAvenue and up Madison. Once, while waiting for a traffic light to change, I watched him out of the cornerof my eye as he stooped to pet a sleazy Pomeranian. "That's a fine animal you got there," he told theowner in a hoarse, countrified drawl.
　　Hamburg Heaven was empty. Nevertheless, he took a seat right beside me at the long counter. Hesmelled of tobacco and sweat. He ordered a cup of coffee, but when it came he didn't touch it. Instead,he chewed on a toothpick and studied me in the wall mirror facing us.
　　"Excuse me," I said, speaking to him via the mirror, "but what do you want?"
　　The question didn't embarrass him; he seemed relieved to have had it asked. "Son," he said, "I need afriend."
　　He brought out a wallet. It was as worn as his leathery hands, almost falling to pieces; and so was thebrittle, cracked, blurred snapshot he handed me. There were seven people in the picture, all groupedtogether on the sagging porch of a stark wooden house, and all children, except for the man himself, who
　　had his arm around the waist of a plump blond little girl with a hand shading her eyes against the sun.
　　had his arm around the waist of a plump blond little girl with a hand shading her eyes against the sun.
　　I looked at "her" again: and yes, now I can see it, an embryonic resemblance to Holly in the squinting,fat-cheeked child. At the same moment, I realized who the man must be.
　　"You're Holly'sfather ."
　　He blinked, he frowned. "Her name's not Holly. She was a Lulamae Barnes. Was," he said, shifting thetoothpick in his mouth, "till she married me. I'm her husband. Doc Golightly. I'm a horse doctor, animalman. Do some farming, too. Near Tulip, Texas. Son, why are you laughin'?"
　　It wasn't real laughter: it was nerves. I took a swallow of water and choked; he pounded me on theback. "This here's no humorous matter, son. I'm a tired man. I've been five years lookin' for my woman.Soon as I got that letter from Fred, saying where she was, I bought myself a ticket on the Greyhound.Lulamae belongs home with her husband and her churren."
　　"Children?"
　　"Them'sher churren," he said, almost shouted. He meant the four other young faces in the picture, twobare-footed girls and a pair of overalled boys. Well, of course: the man was deranged. "But Holly can'tbe the mother of those children. They're older than she is. Bigger."
　　"Now, son," he said in a reasoning voice, "I didn't claim they was her natural-born churren. Their ownprecious mother, precious woman, Jesus rest her soul, she passed away July 4th, Independence Day,1936. The year of the drought. When I married Lulamae, that was in December, 1938, she was going onfourteen. Maybe an ordinary person, being only fourteen, wouldn't know their right mind. But you takeLulamae, she was an exceptional woman. She knew good-and-well what she was doing when shepromised to be my wife and the mother of my churren. She plain broke our hearts when she ran off likeshe done." He sipped his cold coffee, and glanced at me with a searching earnestness. "Now, son, doyou doubt me? Do you believe what I'm saying is so?"
　　I did. It was too implausible not to be fact; moreover, it dovetailed with O.J. Berman's description of theHolly he'd first encountered in California: "You don't know whether she's a hillbilly or an Okie or what."Berman couldn't be blamed for not guessing that she was a child-wife from Tulip, Texas.
　　"Plain broke our hearts when she ran off like she done," the horse doctor repeated. "She had no cause.All the housework was done by her daughters. Lulamae could just take it easy: fuss in front of mirrorsand wash her hair. Our own cows, our own garden, chickens, pigs: son, that woman got positively fat.While her brother growed into a giant. Which is a sight different from how they come to us. 'Twas Nellie,my oldest girl, 'twas Nellie brought 'em into the house. She come to me one morning, and said: 'Papa, Igot two wild yunguns locked in the kitchen. I caught 'em outside stealing milk and turkey eggs.' That wasLulamae and Fred. Well, you never saw a more pitiful something. Ribs sticking out everywhere, legs sopuny they can't hardly stand, teeth wobbling so bad they can't chew mush. Story was: their mother diedof the TB, and their papa done the same -- and all the churren, a whole raft of 'em, they been sent off tolive with different mean people. Now Lulamae and her brother, them two been living with some mean,no-count people a hundred miles east of Tulip. She had good cause to run off from that house. She didn'thave none to leave mine. Twas her home." He leaned his elbows on the counter and, pressing his closedeyes with his fingertips, sighed. "She plumped out to be a real pretty woman. Lively, too. Talky as a
　　jaybird. With something smart to say on every subject: better than the radio. First thing you know, I'mout picking flowers. I tamed her a crow and taught it to say her name. I showed her how to play theguitar. Just to look at her made the tears spring to my eyes. The night I proposed, I cried like a baby.She said: 'What you want to cry for, Doc? 'Course we'll be married. I've never been married before.'Well, I had to laugh, hug and squeeze her:never been married before! " He chuckled, chewed on histoothpick a moment. "Don't tell me that woman wasn't happy!" he said, challengingly. "We all doted onher. She didn't have to lift a finger, 'cept to eat a piece of pie. 'Cept to comb her hair and send away forall the magazines. We must've had a hunnerd dollars' worth of magazines come into that house. Ask me,that's what done it. Looking at show-off pictures. Reading dreams. That's what started her walking downthe road. Every day she'd walk a little further: a mile, and come home. Two miles, and come home. Oneday she just kept on." He put his hands over his eyes again; his breathing made a ragged noise. "Thecrow I give her went wild and flew away. All summer you could hear him. In the yard. In the garden. Inthe woods. All summer that damned bird was calling: Lulamae, Lulamae."
　　jaybird. With something smart to say on every subject: better than the radio. First thing you know, I'mout picking flowers. I tamed her a crow and taught it to say her name. I showed her how to play theguitar. Just to look at her made the tears spring to my eyes. The night I proposed, I cried like a baby.She said: 'What you want to cry for, Doc? 'Course we'll be married. I've never been married before.'Well, I had to laugh, hug and squeeze her:never been married before! " He chuckled, chewed on histoothpick a moment. "Don't tell me that woman wasn't happy!" he said, challengingly. "We all doted onher. She didn't have to lift a finger, 'cept to eat a piece of pie. 'Cept to comb her hair and send away forall the magazines. We must've had a hunnerd dollars' worth of magazines come into that house. Ask me,that's what done it. Looking at show-off pictures. Reading dreams. That's what started her walking downthe road. Every day she'd walk a little further: a mile, and come home. Two miles, and come home. Oneday she just kept on." He put his hands over his eyes again; his breathing made a ragged noise. "Thecrow I give her went wild and flew away. All summer you could hear him. In the yard. In the garden. Inthe woods. All summer that damned bird was calling: Lulamae, Lulamae."
　　"No, sir," he said, clearing his throat. "Fred was with us right till they took him in the Army. A fine boy.Fine with horses. He didn't know what got into Lulamae, how come she left her brother and husband andchurren. After he was in the Army, though, Fred started hearing from her. The other day he wrote me heraddress. So I come to get her. I know he's sorry for what she done. I know she wants to go home." Heseemed to be asking me to agree with him. I told him that I thought he'd find Holly, or Lulamae,somewhat changed. "Listen, son," he said, as we reached the steps of the brownstone, "I advised you Ineed a friend. Because I don't want to surprise her. Scare her none. That's why I've held off. Be myfriend: let her know I'm here."
　　The notion of introducing Mrs. Golightly to her husband had its satisfying aspects; and, glancing up at herlighted windows, I hoped her friends were there, for the prospect of watching the Texan shake handswith Mag and Rusty and Jos└ was more satisfying still. But Doc Golightly's proud earnest eyes andsweat-stained hat made me ashamed of such anticipations. He followed me into the house and preparedto wait at the bottom of the stairs. "Do I look nice?" he whispered, brushing his sleeves, tightening theknot of his tie.
　　Holly was alone. She answered the door at once; in fact, she was on her way out -- white satin dancingpumps and quantities of perfume announced gala intentions. "Well, idiot," she said, and playfully slappedme with her purse. "I'm in too much of a hurry to make up now. We'll smoke the pipe tomorrow, okay?"
　　"Sure, Lulamae. If you're still around tomorrow."
　　She took off her dark glasses and squinted at me. It was as though her eyes were shattered prisms, thedots of blue and gray and green like broken bits of sparkle. "Hetold you that," she said in a small,shivering voice.
　　"Oh, please.Where is he?" She ran past me into the hall. "Fred!" she called down the stairs. "Fred!Where are you, darling?"
　　I could hear Doc Golightly's footsteps climbing the stairs. His head appeared above the banisters, andHolly backed away from him, not as though she were frightened, but as though she were retreating into ashell of disappointment. Then he was standing in front of her, hangdog and shy. "Gosh, Lulamae," he
　　began, and hesitated, for Holly was gazing at him vacantly, as though she couldn't place him. "Gee,honey," he said, "don't they feed you up here? You're so skinny. Like when I first saw you. All wildaround the eye."
　　began, and hesitated, for Holly was gazing at him vacantly, as though she couldn't place him. "Gee,honey," he said, "don't they feed you up here? You're so skinny. Like when I first saw you. All wildaround the eye."
　　Neither of them noticed me when I squeezed past them and went up to my room. Nor did they seemaware of Madame Sapphia Spanella, who opened her door and yelled: "Shut up! It's a disgrace. Do yourwhoring elsewhere."
　　"Divorcehim? Of course I never divorced him. I was only fourteen, for God's sake. It couldn't havebeenlegal ." Holly tapped an empty martini glass. "Two more, my darling Mr. Bell."
　　Joe Bell, in whose bar we were sitting, accepted the order reluctantly. "You're rockin' the boat kindaearly," he complained, crunching on a Tums. It was not yet noon, according to the black mahogany clockbehind the bar, and he'd already served us three rounds.
　　"But it's Sunday, Mr. Bell. Clocks are slow on Sundays. Besides, I haven't been to bed yet," she toldhim, and confided to me: "Not to sleep." She blushed, and glanced away guiltily. For the first time sinceI'd known her, she seemed to feel a need to justify herself: "Well, I had to. Doc really loves me, youknow. And I love him. He may have looked old and tacky to you. But you don't know the sweetness ofhim, the confidence he can give to birds and brats and fragile things like that. Anyone who ever gave youconfidence, you owe them a lot. I've always remembered Doc in my prayers. Please stop smirking!" shedemanded, stabbing out a cigarette. "Ido say my prayers."
　　"I'm not smirking. I'm smiling. You're the most amazing person."
　　"I suppose I am," she said, and her face, wan, rather bruised-looking in the morning light, brightened; shesmoothed her tousled hair, and the colors of it glimmered like a shampoo advertisement. "I must lookfierce. But who wouldn't? We spent the rest of the night roaming around in a bus station. Right up till thelast minute Doc thought I was going to go with him. Even though I kept telling him: But, Doc, I'm notfourteen any more, and I'm not Lulamae. But the terrible part is (and I realized it while we were standingthere) I am. I'm still stealing turkey eggs and running through a brier patch. Only now I call it having themean reds."
　　Joe Bell disdainfully settled the fresh martinis in front of us.
　　"Never love a wild thing, Mr. Bell," Holly advised him. "That was Doc's mistake. He was always lugginghome wild things. A hawk with a hurt wing. One time it was a full-grown bobcat with a broken leg. Butyou can't give your heart to a wild thing: the more you do, the stronger they get. Until they're strongenough to run into the woods. Or fly into a tree. Then a taller tree. Then the sky. That's how you'll endup, Mr. Bell. If you let yourself love a wild thing. You'll end up looking at the sky."
　　"She's drunk," Joe Bell informed me.
　　"Moderately," Holly confessed. "But Doc knew what I meant. I explained it to him very carefully, and itwas something he could understand. We shook hands and held on to each other and he wished me luck."
　　She glanced at the clock. "He must be in the Blue Mountains by now."
　　She glanced at the clock. "He must be in the Blue Mountains by now."
　　Holly lifted her martini. "Let's wish the Doc luck, too," she said, touching her glass against mine. "Goodluck: and believe me, dearest Doc -- it's better to look at the sky than live there. Such an empty place; sovague. Just a country where the thunder goes and things disappear."
　　TRAWLER MARRIES FOURTH. I was on a subway somewhere in Brooklyn when I saw thatheadline. The paper that bannered it belonged to another passenger. The only part of the text that I couldsee read:Rutherfurd "Rusty" Trawler, the millionaire playboy often accused of pro-Nazisympathies, eloped to Greenwich yesterday with a beautiful -- Not that I wanted to read any more.Holly had married him: well, well. I wished I were under the wheels of the train. But I'd been wishing thatbefore I spotted the headline. For a headful of reasons. I hadn't seen Holly, not really, since our drunkenSunday at Joe Bell's bar. The intervening weeks had given me my own case of the mean reds. First off,I'd been fired from my job: deservedly, and for an amusing misdemeanor too complicated to recounthere. Also, my draft board was displaying an uncomfortable interest; and, having so recently escaped theregimentation of a small town, the idea of entering another form of disciplined life made me desperate.Between the uncertainty of my draft status and a lack of specific experience, I couldn't seem to findanother job. That was what I was doing on a subway in Brooklyn: returning from a discouraginginterview with an editor of the now defunct newspaper,PM . All this, combined with the city heat of thesummer, had reduced me to a state of nervous inertia. So I more than half meant it when I wished I wereunder the wheels of the train. The headline made the desire quite positive. If Holly could marry that"absurd foetus," then the army of wrongness rampant in the world might as well march over me. Or, andthe question is apparent, was my outrage a little the result of being in love with Holly myself? A little. ForI was in love with her. Just as I'd once been in love with my mother's elderly colored cook and apostman who let me follow him on his rounds and a whole family named McKendrick. That category oflove generates jealousy, too.
　　When I reached my station I bought a paper; and, reading the tail-end of that sentence, discovered thatRusty's bride was:a beautiful cover girl from the Arkansas hills, Miss Margaret Thatcher FitzhueWildwood . Mag! My legs went so limp with relief I took a taxi the rest of the way home.
　　Madame Sapphia Spanella met me in the hall, wild-eyed and wringing her hands. "Run," she said. "Bringthe police. She is killing somebody! Somebody is killing her!"
　　It sounded like it. As though tigers were loose in Holly's apartment. A riot of crashing glass, of rippingsand callings and overturned furniture. But there were no quarreling voices inside the uproar, which madeit seem unnatural. "Run," shrieked Madame Spanella, pushing me. "Tell the police murder!"
　　I ran; but only upstairs to Holly's door. Pounding on it had one result: the racket subsided. Stoppedaltogether. But leading to let me in went unanswered, and my efforts to break down the door merelyculminated in a bruised shoulder. Then below I heard Madame Spanella commanding some newcomer togo for the police. "Shut up," she was told, "and get out of my way."
　　It was Jos└ Ybarra-Jaegar. Looking not at all the smart Brazilian diplomat; but sweaty and frightened.He ordered me out of his way, too. And, using his own key, opened the door. "In here, Dr. Goldman,"he said, beckoning to a man accompanying him.
　　Since no one prevented me, I followed them into the apartment, which was tremendously wrecked. Atlast the Christmas tree had been dismantled, very literally: its brown dry branches sprawled in a welter oftorn-up books, broken lamps and phonograph records. Even the icebox had been emptied, its contentstossed around the room: raw eggs were sliding down the walls and in the midst of the debris Holly'sno-name cat was calmly licking a puddle of milk.
　　Since no one prevented me, I followed them into the apartment, which was tremendously wrecked. Atlast the Christmas tree had been dismantled, very literally: its brown dry branches sprawled in a welter oftorn-up books, broken lamps and phonograph records. Even the icebox had been emptied, its contentstossed around the room: raw eggs were sliding down the walls and in the midst of the debris Holly'sno-name cat was calmly licking a puddle of milk.
　　Holly rubbed her forehead, leaving a smear of blood from a cut finger. "Sleep," she said, and whimperedlike an exhausted, fretful child. "He's the only one would ever let me. Let me hug him on cold nights. Isaw a place in Mexico. With horses. By the sea."
　　"With horses by the sea," lullabied the doctor, selecting from his black case a hypodermic.
　　Jos└ averted his face, queasy at the sight of a needle. "Her sickness is only grief?" he asked, his difficultEnglish lending the question an unintended irony. "She is grieving only?"
　　"Didn't hurt a bit, now did it?" inquired the doctor, smugly dabbing Holly's arm with a scrap of cotton.
　　She came to sufficiently to focus the doctor. "Everythinghurts. Where are my glasses?" But she didn'tneed them. Her eyes were closing of their own accord.
　　"She is only grieving?" insisted Jos└.
　　"Please, sir," the doctor was quite short with him, "if you will leave me alone with the patient."
　　Jos└ withdrew to the front room, where he released his temper on the snooping, tiptoeing presence ofMadame Spanella. "Don't touch me! I'll call the police," she threatened as he whipped her to the doorwith Portuguese oaths.
　　He considered throwing me out, too; or so I surmised from his expression. Instead, he invited me tohave a drink. The only unbroken bottle we could find contained dry vermouth. "I have a worry," heconfided. "I have a worry that this should cause scandal. Her crashing everything. Conducting like acrazy. I must have no public scandal. It is too delicate: my name, my work."
　　He seemed cheered to learn that I saw no reason for a "scandal"; demolishing one's own possessionswas, presumably, a private affair.
　　"It is only a question of grieving," he firmly declared. "When the sadness came, first she throws the drinkshe is drinking. The bottle. Those books. A lamp. Then I am scared. I hurry to bring a doctor."
　　"But why?" I wanted to know. "Why should she have a fit over, Rusty? If I were her, I'd celebrate."
　　"Rusty?"
　　I was still carrying my newspaper, and showed him the headline.
　　"Oh, that." He grinned rather scornfully. "They do us a grand favor, Rusty and Mag. We laugh over it:
　　how they think they break our hearts when all the time we want them to run away. I assure you, we werelaughing when the sadness came." His eyes searched the litter on the floor; he picked up a ball of yellowpaper. "This," he said.
　　how they think they break our hearts when all the time we want them to run away. I assure you, we werelaughing when the sadness came." His eyes searched the litter on the floor; he picked up a ball of yellowpaper. "This," he said.
　　Which is not to imply that she had lost interest in life; far from it, she seemed more content, altogetherhappier than I'd ever seen her. A keen sudden un-Holly-like enthusiasm for homemaking resulted inseveral un-Holly-like purchases: at a Parke-Bernet auction she acquired a stag-at-bay hunting tapestryand, from the William Randolph Hearst estate, a gloomy pair of Gothic "easy" chairs; she bought thecomplete Modern Library, shelves of classical records, innumerable. Metropolitan Museumreproductions (including a statue of a Chinese cat that her own cat hated and hissed at and ultimatelybroke), a Waring mixer and a pressure cooker and a library of cook books. She spent whole hausfrauafternoons slopping about in the sweatbox of her midget kitchen: "Jos└ says I'm better than the Colony.Really, who would have dreamed I had such a great natural talent? A month ago I couldn't scrambleeggs." And still couldn't, for that matter. Simple dishes, steak, a proper salad, were beyond her. Instead,she fed Jos└, and occasionally myself,outr└ soups (brandied black terrapin poured into avocado shells)Nero-ish novelties (roasted pheasant stuffed with pomegranates and persimmons) and other dubiousinnovations (chicken and saffron rice served with a chocolate sauce: "An East Indian classic,my dear.")Wartime sugar and cream rationing restricted her imagination when it came to sweets -- nevertheless, sheonce managed something called Tobacco Tapioca: best not describe it.
　　Nor describe her attempts to master Portuguese, an ordeal as tedious to me as it was to her, forwhenever I visited her an album of Linguaphone records never ceased rotating on the phonograph. Now,too, she rarely spoke a sentence that did not begin, "After we're married -- " or "When we move to Rio-- " Yet Jos└ had never suggested marriage. She admitted it. "But, after all, heknows I'm preggers. Well,I am, darling. Six weeks gone. I don't see whythat should surprise you. It didn't me. Notun peu bit. I'mdelighted. I want to have at least nine. I'm sure some of them will be rather dark -- Jos└ has a touch oflen┬gre , I suppose you guessed that? Which is fine by me: what could be prettier than a quite coony babywith bright green beautiful eyes? I wish, please don't laugh -- but I wish I'd been a virgin for him, forJos└. Not that I've warmed the multitudes some people say: I don't blame the bastards for saying it, I'vealways thrown out such a jazzy line. Really, though, I toted up the other night, and I've only had elevenlovers -- not counting anything that happened before I was thirteen because, after all, that justdoesn'tcount. Eleven. Does that make me a whore? Look at Mag Wildwood. Or Honey Tucker. Or Rose EllenWard. They've had the old clap-yo'-hands so many times it amounts to applause. Of course I haven'tanythingagainst whores. Except this: some of them may have an honest tongue but they all havedishonest hearts. I mean, you can't bang the guy and cash his checks and at least nottry to believe youlove him. I never have. Even Benny Shacklett and all those rodents. I sort of hypnotized myself intothinking their sheer rattiness had a certain allure. Actually, except for Doc, if you want to count Doc, Jos└is my first non-rat romance. Oh, he's not my idea of the absolute finito. He tells little lies and he worrieswhat peoplethink and he takes about fifty baths a day: men ought to smell somewhat. He's too prim, toocautious to be my guy ideal; he always turns his back to get undressed and he makes too much noisewhen he eats and I don't like to see him run because there's something funny-looking about him when he
　　runs. If I were free to choose from everybody alive, just snap my fingers and say come here you, Iwouldn't pick Jos└. Nehru, he's nearer the mark. Wendell Wilkie. I'd settle for Garbo any day. Why not?A person ought to be able to marry men or women or -- listen, if you came to me and said you wantedto hitch up with Man o' War, I'd respect your feeling. No, I'm serious. Love should be allowed. I'm allfor it. Now that I've got a pretty good idea what it is. Because Ido love Jos└ -- I'd stop smoking if heasked me to. He'sfriendly , he can laugh me out of the mean reds, only I don't have them much anymore, except sometimes, and even then they're not so hideola that I gulp Seconal or have to haul myselfto Tiffany's: I take his suit to the cleaner, or stuff some mushrooms, and I feel fine, just great. Anotherthing, I've thrown away my horoscopes. I must have spent a dollar on every goddamn star in thegoddamn planetarium. It's a bore, but the answer, is good things only happen to you if you're good.Good? Honest is more what I mean. Not law-type honest -- I'd rob a grave, I'd steal two-bits off a deadman's eyes if I thought it would contribute to the day's enjoyment -- but unto-thyself-type honest. Beanything but a coward, a pretender, an emotional crook, a whore: I'd rather have cancer than a dishonestheart. Which isn't being pious. Just practical. Cancermay cool you, but the other's sure to. Oh, screw it,cookie -- hand me my guitar, and I'll sing you afada inthe most perfect Portuguese."
　　runs. If I were free to choose from everybody alive, just snap my fingers and say come here you, Iwouldn't pick Jos└. Nehru, he's nearer the mark. Wendell Wilkie. I'd settle for Garbo any day. Why not?A person ought to be able to marry men or women or -- listen, if you came to me and said you wantedto hitch up with Man o' War, I'd respect your feeling. No, I'm serious. Love should be allowed. I'm allfor it. Now that I've got a pretty good idea what it is. Because Ido love Jos└ -- I'd stop smoking if heasked me to. He'sfriendly , he can laugh me out of the mean reds, only I don't have them much anymore, except sometimes, and even then they're not so hideola that I gulp Seconal or have to haul myselfto Tiffany's: I take his suit to the cleaner, or stuff some mushrooms, and I feel fine, just great. Anotherthing, I've thrown away my horoscopes. I must have spent a dollar on every goddamn star in thegoddamn planetarium. It's a bore, but the answer, is good things only happen to you if you're good.Good? Honest is more what I mean. Not law-type honest -- I'd rob a grave, I'd steal two-bits off a deadman's eyes if I thought it would contribute to the day's enjoyment -- but unto-thyself-type honest. Beanything but a coward, a pretender, an emotional crook, a whore: I'd rather have cancer than a dishonestheart. Which isn't being pious. Just practical. Cancermay cool you, but the other's sure to. Oh, screw it,cookie -- hand me my guitar, and I'll sing you afada inthe most perfect Portuguese."
　　It happened to fall on the 30th of September, my birthday, a fact which had no effect on events, exceptthat, expecting some form of monetary remembrance from my family, I was eager for the postman'smorning visit. Indeed, I went downstairs and waited for him. If I had not been loitering in the vestibule,then Holly would not have asked me to go horseback riding; and would not, consequently, have had theopportunity to save my life.
　　"Come on," she said, when she found me awaiting the postman. "Let's walk a couple of horses aroundthe park." She was wearing a windbreaker and a pair of blue jeans and tennis shoes; she slapped herstomach, drawing attention to its flatness: "Don't think I'm out to lose the heir. But there's a horse, mydarling old Mabel Minerva -- I can't go without saying good-bye to Mabel Minerva."
　　"Good-bye?"
　　"A week from Saturday. Jos└ bought the tickets." In rather a trance, I let her lead me down to the street."We change planes in Miami. Then over the sea. Over the Andes. Taxi!"
　　Over the Andes. As we rode in a cab across Central Park it seemed to me as though I, too, were flying,desolately floating over snow-peaked and perilous territory.
　　Over the Andes. As we rode in a cab across Central Park it seemed to me as though I, too, were flying,desolately floating over snow-peaked and perilous territory.
　　"I don't think anyone will miss me. I have no friends."
　　"I will. Miss you. So will Joe Bell. And oh -- millions. Like Sally. Poor Mr. Tomato."
　　"I loved old Sally," she said, and sighed. "You know I haven't been to see him in a month? When I toldhim I was going away, he was an angel.Actually " -- she frowned -- "he seemeddelighted that I wasleaving the country. He said it was all for the best. Because sooner or later there might be trouble. If theyfound out I wasn't his real niece. That fat lawyer, O'Shaughnessy, O'Shaughnessy sent me five hundreddollars. In cash. A wedding present from Sally."
　　I wanted to be unkind. "You can expect a present from me, too. When, and if, the wedding happens."
　　She laughed. "He'll marry me, all right. In church. And with his family there. That's why we're waiting tillwe get to Rio."
　　"Does he know you're married already?"
　　"What's the matter with you? Are you trying to ruin the day? It's a beautiful day: leave it alone!"
　　"But it's perfectly possible -- "
　　"Itisn't possible. I've told you, that wasn't legal. Itcouldn't be." She rubbed her nose, and glanced at mesideways. "Mention that to a living soul, darling. I'll hang you by your toes and dress you for a hog."
　　The stables -- I believe they have been replaced by television studios -- were on West Sixty-sixth streetHolly selected for me an old sway-back black and white mare: "Don't worry, she's safer than a cradle."Which, in my case, was a necessary guarantee, for ten-cent pony rides at childhood carnivals were thelimit of my equestrian experience. Holly helped hoist me into the saddle, then mounted her own horse, asilvery animal that took the lead as we jogged across the traffic of Central Park West and entered ariding path dappled with leaves denuding breezes danced about.
　　"See?" she shouted. "It's great!" And suddenly it was. Suddenly, watching the tangled colors of Holly'shair flash in the red-yellow leaf light, I loved her enough to forget myself, my self-pitying despairs, and becontent that something she thought happy was going to happen. Very gently the horses began to trot,waves of wind splashed us, spanked our faces, we plunged in and out of sun and shadow pools, and joy,a glad-to-be-alive exhilaration, jolted through me like a jigger of nitrogen. That was one minute; the nextintroduced farce in grim disguise.
　　For all at once, like savage members of a jungle ambush, a band of Negro boys leapt out of theshrubbery along the path. Hooting, cursing, they launched rocks and thrashed at the horse's rumps withswitches.
　　Mine, the black and white mare, rose on her hind legs, whinnied, teetered like a tightrope artist, thenblue-streaked down the path, bouncing my feet out of the stirrups and leaving me scarcely attached. Herhooves made the gravel stones spit sparks. The sky careened. Trees, a lake with little-boy sailboats,
　　statues went by licketysplit. Nursemaids rushed to rescue their charges from our awesome approach;men, bums and others, yelled: "Pull in the reins!" and "Whoa, boy, whoa!" and "Jump!" It was only laterthat I remembered these voices; at the time I was simply conscious of Holly, the cowboy-sound of herracing behind me, never quite catching up, and over and over calling encouragements. Onward: acrossthe park and out into Fifth Avenue: stampeding against the noonday traffic, taxis, buses that screechinglyswerved. Past the Duke mansion, the Frick Museum, past the Pierre and the Plaza. But Holly gainedground; moreover, a mounted policeman had joined the chase: flanking my runaway mare, one on eitherside, their horses performed a pincer movement that brought her to a steamy halt. It was then, at last, thatI fell off her back. Fell off and picked myself up and stood there, not altogether certain where I was. Acrowd gathered. The policeman huffed and wrote in a book: presently he was most sympathetic, grinnedand said he would arrange for our horses to be returned to their stable.
　　statues went by licketysplit. Nursemaids rushed to rescue their charges from our awesome approach;men, bums and others, yelled: "Pull in the reins!" and "Whoa, boy, whoa!" and "Jump!" It was only laterthat I remembered these voices; at the time I was simply conscious of Holly, the cowboy-sound of herracing behind me, never quite catching up, and over and over calling encouragements. Onward: acrossthe park and out into Fifth Avenue: stampeding against the noonday traffic, taxis, buses that screechinglyswerved. Past the Duke mansion, the Frick Museum, past the Pierre and the Plaza. But Holly gainedground; moreover, a mounted policeman had joined the chase: flanking my runaway mare, one on eitherside, their horses performed a pincer movement that brought her to a steamy halt. It was then, at last, thatI fell off her back. Fell off and picked myself up and stood there, not altogether certain where I was. Acrowd gathered. The policeman huffed and wrote in a book: presently he was most sympathetic, grinnedand said he would arrange for our horses to be returned to their stable.
　　"Fine."
　　"But you haven'tany pulse," she said, feeling my wrist.
　　"Then I must be dead."
　　"No, idiot. This is serious. Look at me."
　　The trouble was, I couldn't see her; rather, I saw several Holly's, a trio of sweaty faces so white withconcern that I was both touched and embarrassed. "Honestly. I don't feel anything. Except ashamed."
　　"Please. Are you sure? Tell me the truth. You might have been killed."
　　"But I wasn't. And thank you. For saving my life. You're wonderful. Unique. I love you."
　　"Damn fool." She kissed me on the cheek. Then there were four of her, and I fainted dead away.
　　That evening, photographs of Holly were frontpaged by the late edition of theJournal-American and bythe early editions of both theDaily News and theDaily Mirror . The publicity had nothing to do withrunaway horses. It concerned quite another matter, as the headlines revealed: PLAYGIRL ARRESTEDIN NARCOTICS SCANDAL (Journal-American), ARREST DOPE-SMUGGLING ACTRESS (Daily News), DRUG RING EXPOSED, GLAMOUR GIRL HELD (Daily Mirror).
　　Of the lot, theNews printed the most striking picture: Holly, entering police headquarters, wedgedbetween two muscular detectives, one male, one female. In this squalid context even her clothes (she wasstill wearing her riding costume, windbreaker and blue jeans) suggested a gang-moll hooligan: animpression dark glasses, disarrayed coiffure and a Picayune cigarette dangling from sullen lips did notdiminish. The caption read:Twenty-year-old Holly Golightly, beautiful movie starlet and cafe societycelebrity D.A. alleges to be key figure in international drug-smuggling racket linked to racketeerSalvatore "Sally" Tomato. Dets. Patrick Connor and Sheilah Fezzonetti (L. and R.) are shownescorting her into 67th St. Precinct. See story on Pg. 3 . The story, featuring a photograph of a manidentified as Oliver "Father" O'Shaughnessy (shielding his face with a fedora), ran three full columns.Here, somewhat condensed, are the pertinent paragraphs:Members of caf└ society were stunned todayby the arrest of gorgeous Holly Golightly, twenty-year-old Hollywood starlet and highly publicizedgirl-about-New York. At the same time, 2 P.M., police nabbed Oliver O'Shaughnessy, 52, of the
　　Hotel Seabord, W. 49th St., as he exited from a Hamburg Heaven on Madison Ave. Both arealleged by District Attorney Frank L. Donovan to be important figures in an international drugring dominated by the notorious Mafia-f┨hrer Salvatore "Sally" Tomato, currently in Sing Singserving a five-year rap for political bribery ... O'Shaughnessy, a defrocked priest variously knownin crimeland circles as "Father" and "The Padre," has a history of arrests dating back to 1934,when he served two years for operating a phony Rhode Island mental institution, The Monastery.Miss Golightly, who has no previous criminal record, was arrested in her luxurious apartment at aswank East Side address ... Although the D.A.'s office has issued no formal statement, responsiblesources insist the blond and beautiful actress, not long ago the constant companion ofmultimillionaire Rutherfurd Trawler, has been acting as "liaison" between the imprisoned Tomatoand his chief-lieutenant, O'Shaughnessy ... Posing as a relative of Tomato's, Miss Golightly is saidto have paid weekly visits to Sing Sing, and on these occasions Tomato supplied her with verballycoded messages which she then transmitted to O'Shaughnessy. Via this link, Tomato, believed tohave been born in Cefalu, Sicily, in 1874, was able to keep firsthand control of a world-widenarcotics syndicate with outposts in Mexico, Cuba, Sicily, Tangier, Tehran and Dakar. But theD.A.'s office refused to offer any detail on these allegations or even verify them ... Tipped off, alarge number of reporters were on hand at the E. 67th St. Precinct station when the accused pairarrived for booking. O'Shaughnessy, a burly red-haired man, refused comment and kicked onecameraman in the groin. But Miss Golightly, a fragile eyeful, even though attired like a tomboy inslacks and leather jacket, appeared relatively unconcerned. "Don't ask me what the hell this isabout," she told reporters. "Parce-que Je ne sais pas, mes ch┬res. (Because I do not know, mydears). Yes -- I have visited Sally Tomato. I used to go to see him every week. What's wrong withthat? He believes in God, and so do I. " ...
　　Hotel Seabord, W. 49th St., as he exited from a Hamburg Heaven on Madison Ave. Both arealleged by District Attorney Frank L. Donovan to be important figures in an international drugring dominated by the notorious Mafia-f┨hrer Salvatore "Sally" Tomato, currently in Sing Singserving a five-year rap for political bribery ... O'Shaughnessy, a defrocked priest variously knownin crimeland circles as "Father" and "The Padre," has a history of arrests dating back to 1934,when he served two years for operating a phony Rhode Island mental institution, The Monastery.Miss Golightly, who has no previous criminal record, was arrested in her luxurious apartment at aswank East Side address ... Although the D.A.'s office has issued no formal statement, responsiblesources insist the blond and beautiful actress, not long ago the constant companion ofmultimillionaire Rutherfurd Trawler, has been acting as "liaison" between the imprisoned Tomatoand his chief-lieutenant, O'Shaughnessy ... Posing as a relative of Tomato's, Miss Golightly is saidto have paid weekly visits to Sing Sing, and on these occasions Tomato supplied her with verballycoded messages which she then transmitted to O'Shaughnessy. Via this link, Tomato, believed tohave been born in Cefalu, Sicily, in 1874, was able to keep firsthand control of a world-widenarcotics syndicate with outposts in Mexico, Cuba, Sicily, Tangier, Tehran and Dakar. But theD.A.'s office refused to offer any detail on these allegations or even verify them ... Tipped off, alarge number of reporters were on hand at the E. 67th St. Precinct station when the accused pairarrived for booking. O'Shaughnessy, a burly red-haired man, refused comment and kicked onecameraman in the groin. But Miss Golightly, a fragile eyeful, even though attired like a tomboy inslacks and leather jacket, appeared relatively unconcerned. "Don't ask me what the hell this isabout," she told reporters. "Parce-que Je ne sais pas, mes ch┬res. (Because I do not know, mydears). Yes -- I have visited Sally Tomato. I used to go to see him every week. What's wrong withthat? He believes in God, and so do I. " ...
　　There is one especially gross error in this report: she was not arrested in her "luxurious apartment." Ittook place in my own bathroom. I was soaking away my horse-ride pains in a tub of scalding waterlaced with Epsom salts; Holly, an attentive nurse, was sitting on the edge of the tub waiting to rub me withSloan's liniment and tuck me into bed. There was a knock at the front door. As the door was unlocked,Holly called Come in. In came Madame Sapphia Spanella, trailed by a pair of civilian-clothed detectives,one of them a lady with thick yellow braids roped round her head.
　　"Hereshe is: the wanted woman!" boomed Madame Spanella, invading the bathroom and leveling afinger, first at Holly's, then my nakedness. "Look. What a whore she is." The male detective seemedembarrassed: by Madame Spanella and by the situation; but a harsh enjoyment tensed the face of hiscompanion -- she plumped a hand on Holly's shoulder and, in a surprising baby-child voice, said: "Comealong, sister. You're going places." Whereupon Holly coolly told her: "Get them cotton-pickin' hands offof me, you dreary, driveling old bull-dyke." Which rather enraged the lady: she slapped Holly damnedhard. So hard, her head twisted on her neck, and the bottle of linement, flung from her hand,smithereened on the tile floor -- where I, scampering out of the tub to enrich the fray, stepped on it andall but severed both big toes. Nude and bleeding a path of bloody footprints, I followed the action as faras the hall. "Don't forget," Holly managed to instruct me as the detectives propelled her down the stairs,"please feed the cat."
　　Of course I believed Madame Spanella to blame: she'd several times called the authorities to complainabout Holly. It didn't occur to me the affair could have dire dimensions until that evening when Joe Bellshowed up flourishing the newspapers. He was too agitated to speak sensibly; he caroused the roomhitting his fists together while I read the accounts.
　　Of course I believed Madame Spanella to blame: she'd several times called the authorities to complainabout Holly. It didn't occur to me the affair could have dire dimensions until that evening when Joe Bellshowed up flourishing the newspapers. He was too agitated to speak sensibly; he caroused the roomhitting his fists together while I read the accounts.
　　"Well, yes."
　　He popped a Tums in his mouth and, glaring at me, chewed it as though he were crunching my bones."Boy, that's rotten. And you meant to be her friend. What a bastard!"
　　"Just a minute. I didn't say she was involvedknowingly . She wasn't. But there, she did do it. Carrymessages and whatnot -- "
　　He said: "Take it pretty calm, don't you? Jesus, she could get ten years. More." He yanked the papersaway from me. "You know her friends. These rich fellows. Come down to the bar, we'll start phoning.Our girl's going to need fancier shysters than I can afford."
　　I was too sore and shaky to dress myself; Joe Bell had to help. Back at his bar he propped me in thetelephone booth with a triple martini and a brandy tumbler full of coins. But I couldn't think who tocontact. Jos└ was in Washington, and I had no notion where to reach him there. Rusty Trawler? Not thatbastard! Only: what other friends of hers did I know? Perhaps she'd been right when she'd said she hadnone, not really.
　　I put through a call to Crestview 5-6958 in Beverly Hills, the number long-distance information gave mefor O.J. Berman. The person who answered said Mr. Berman was having a massage and couldn't bedisturbed: sorry, try later. Joe Bell was incensed -- told me I should have said it was a life and deathmatter; and he insisted on my trying Rusty. First, I spoke to Mr. Trawler's butler -- Mr. and Mrs.Trawler, he announced, were at dinner and might he take a message? Joe Bell shouted into the receiver:"This is urgent, mister. Life and death." The outcome was that I found myself talking -- listening, rather -tothe former Mag Wildwood: "Are you starkers?" she demanded. "My husband and I will positivelysueanyone who attempts to connect our names with that ro-ro-rovolting and de-de-degenerate girl. Ialwaysknew she was a hop-hop-head with no more morals than a hound-bitch in heat. Prison is whereshe belongs. And my husband agrees one thousand percent. We will positivelysue anyone who -- "Hanging up, I remembered old Doc down in Tulip, Texas; but no, Holly wouldn't like it if I called him,she'd kill me good.
　　I rang California again; the circuits were busy, stayed busy, and by the time O.J. Berman was on the lineI'd emptied so many martinis he had to tell me why I was phoning him: "About the kid, is it? I knowalready. I spoke already to Iggy Fitelstein. Iggy's the best shingle in New York. I said Iggy you take careof it, send me the bill, only keep my name anonymous, see. Well, I owe the kid something. Not that Iowe her anything, you want to come down to it. She's crazy. A phony. But areal phony, you know?Anyway, they only got her in ten thousand bail. Don't worry, Iggy'll spring her tonight -- it wouldn'tsurprise me she's home already."
　　But she wasn't; nor had she returned the next morning when I went down to feed her cat. Having no keyto the apartment, I used the fire escape and gained entrance through a window. The cat was in thebedroom, and he was not alone: a man was there, crouching over a suitcase. The two of us, each thinking
　　the other a burglar, exchanged uncomfortable stares as I stepped through the window. He had a prettyface, lacquered hair, he resembled Jos└; moreover, the suitcase he'd been packing contained thewardrobe Jos└ kept at Holly's, the shoes and suits she fussed over, was always carting to menders andcleaners. And I said, certain it was so: "Did Mr. Ybarra-Jaegar send you?"
　　the other a burglar, exchanged uncomfortable stares as I stepped through the window. He had a prettyface, lacquered hair, he resembled Jos└; moreover, the suitcase he'd been packing contained thewardrobe Jos└ kept at Holly's, the shoes and suits she fussed over, was always carting to menders andcleaners. And I said, certain it was so: "Did Mr. Ybarra-Jaegar send you?"
　　"Where is Jos└?"
　　He repeated the question, as though translating it into another language. "Ah,where she is! She iswailing," he said and, seeming to dismiss me, resumed his valet activities.
　　So: the diplomat was planning a powder. Well, I wasn't amazed; or in the slightest sorry. Still, what aheartbreaking stunt: "He ought to be horse-whipped."
　　The cousin giggled, I'm sure he understood me. He shut the suitcase and produced a letter. "My cousin,she ask me leave that for his chum. You will oblige?"
　　On the envelope was scribbled:For Miss H. Golightly -- Courtesy Bearer .
　　I sat down on Holly's bed, and hugged Holly's cat to me, and felt as badly for Holly, every iota, as shecould feel for herself.
　　"Yes, I will oblige."
　　And I did: without the least wanting to. But I hadn't the courage to destroy the letter; or the will power tokeep it in my pocket when Holly very tentatively inquired if, if by any chance, I'd had news of Jos└. Itwas two mornings later; I was sitting by her bedside in a room that reeked of iodine and bedpans, ahospital room. She had been there since the night of her arrest. "Well, darling," she'd greeted me, as Itiptoed toward her carrying a carton of Picayune cigarettes and a wheel of new-autumn violets, "I lost theheir." She looked not quite twelve years: her pale vanilla hair brushed back, her eyes, for once minus theirdark glasses, clear as rain water -- one couldn't believe how ill she'd been.
　　Yet it was true: "Christ, I nearly cooled. No fooling, the fat woman almost had me. She was yakking upa storm. I guess I couldn't have told you about the fat woman. Since I didn't know about her myself untilmy brother died. Right away I was wondering where he'd gone, what it meant, Fred's dying; and then Isaw her, she was there in the room with me, and she had Fred cradled in her arms, a fat mean red bitchrocking in a rocking chair with Fred on her lap and laughing like a brass band. The mockery of it! But it'sall that's ahead for us, my friend: this comedienne waiting to give you the old razz. Now do you see why Iwent crazy and broke everything?"
　　Except for the lawyer O.J. Berman had hired, I was the only visitor she had been allowed. Her roomwas shared by other patients, a trio of triplet-like ladies who, examining me with an interest not unkindbut total, speculated in whispered Italian. Holly explained that: "They think you're my downfall, darling.The fellow what done me wrong"; and, to a suggestion that she set them straight, replied: "I can't. Theydon't speak English. Anyway, I wouldn't dream of spoiling their fun." It was then that she asked aboutJos└.
　　The instant she saw the letter she squinted her eyes and bent her lips in a tough tiny smile that advanced
　　her age immeasurably. "Darling," she instructed me, "would you reach in the drawer there and give me mypurse. A girl doesn't read this sort of thing without her lipstick."
　　her age immeasurably. "Darling," she instructed me, "would you reach in the drawer there and give me mypurse. A girl doesn't read this sort of thing without her lipstick."
　　It began: "My dearest little girl -- "
　　Holly at once interrupted. She wanted to know what I thought of the handwriting. I thought nothing: atight, highly legible, uneccentric script. "It's him to a T. Buttoned up and constipated," she declared. "Goon."
　　"My dearest little girl, I have loved you knowing you were not as others. But conceive of my despairupon discovering in such a brutal and public style how very different you are from the manner of womana man of my faith and career could hope to make his wife. Verily I grief for the disgrace of your presentcircumstance, and do not find it in my heart to add my condemn to the condemn that surrounds you. So Ihope you will find it in your heart not to condemn me. I have my family to protect, and my name, and Iam a coward where those institutions enter. Forget me, beautiful child. I am no longer here. I am gonehome. But may God always be with you and your child. May God be not the same as -- Jos└."
　　"Well?"
　　"In a way it seems quite honest. And even touching."
　　"Touching?That square-ball jazz!"
　　"But after all, hesays he's a coward; and from his point of view, you must see -- "
　　Holly, however, did not want to admit that she saw; yet her face, despite its cosmetic disguise,confessed it. "All right, he's not a rat without reason. A super-sized, King Kong-type rat like Rusty.Benny Shacklett. But oh gee, golly goddamn," she said, jamming a fist into her mouth like a bawlingbaby, "Idid love him. The rat."
　　The Italian trio imagined a lover'scrise and, placing the blame for Holly's groanings where they felt itbelonged, tut-tutted their tongues at me. I was flattered: proud that anyone should think Holly cared forme. She quieted when I offered her another cigarette. She swallowed and said: "Bless you, Buster. Andbless you for being such a bad jockey. If I hadn't had to play Calamity Jane I'd still be looking forward tothe grub in an unwed mama's home. Strenuous exercise, that's what did the trick. But I've scaredlamerde out of the whole badge-department by saying it was because Miss Dykeroo slapped me. Yessir, Ican sue them on several counts, including false arrest."
　　Until then, we'd skirted mention of her more sinister tribulations, and this jesting reference to themseemed appalling, pathetic, so definitely did it reveal how incapable she was of recognizing the bleakrealities before her. "Now, Holly," I said, thinking: be strong, mature, an uncle. "Now, Holly. We can'ttreat it as a joke. We have to make plans."
　　"You're too young to be stuffy. Too small. By the way, what business is it of yours?"
　　"You're too young to be stuffy. Too small. By the way, what business is it of yours?"
　　She rubbed her nose, and concentrated on the ceiling. "Today's Wednesday, isn't it? So I suppose I'llsleep until Saturday, really get a goodschluffen . Saturday morning I'll skip out to the bank. Then I'll stopby the apartment and pick up a nightgown or two and my Mainbocher. Following which, I'll report toIdlewild. Where, as you damn well know, I have a perfectly fine reservation on a perfectly fine plane.And since you're such a friend I'll let you wave me off.Please stop shaking your head."
　　"Holly. Holly. You can't do that."
　　"Et pourquoi pas? I'm not hot-footing after Jos└, if that's what you suppose. According to my census,he's strictly a citizen of Limboville. It's only: why should I waste a perfectly fine ticket? Already paid for?Besides, I've never been to Brazil."
　　"Just what kind of pills have they been feeding you here? Can't you realize, you're under a criminalindictment. If they catch you jumping bail, they'll throw away the key. Even if you get away with it, you'llnever be able to come home."
　　"Well, so, tough titty. Anyway, home is where you feel at home. I'm still looking."
　　"No, Holly, it's stupid. You're innocent. You've got to stick it out."
　　She said, "Rah, team, rah," and blew smoke in my face. She was impressed, however; her eyes weredilated by unhappy visions, as were mine: iron rooms, steel corridors of gradually closing doors. "Oh,screw it," she said, and stabbed out her cigarette. "I have a fair chance theywon't catch me. Providedyoukeep yourbouche fermez . Look. Don't despise me, darling." She put her hand over mine and pressed itwith sudden immense sincerity. "I haven't much choice. I talked it over with the lawyer: oh, I didn't tellhim anythingregarding Rio -- he'd tip the badgers himself, rather than lose his fee, to say nothing of thenickels O.J. put up for bail. Bless O.J.'s heart; but once on the coast I helped him win more than ten thouin a single poker hand: we're square. No, here's the real shake: all the badgers want from me is a coupleof free grabs and my services as a state's witness against Sally -- nobody has any intention of prosecutingme, they haven't a ghost of a case. Well, I may be rotten to the core, Maude,but : testify against a friendI will not. Not if they can prove he doped Sister Kenny. My yardstick is how somebody treats me, andold Sally, all right he wasn't absolutely white with me, say he took a slight advantage, just the same Sally'san okay shooter, and I'd let the fat woman snatch me sooner than help the law-boys pin him down."Tilting her compact mirror above her face, smoothing her lipstick with a crooked pinkie, she said: "Andto be honest, that isn't all. Certain shades of limelight wreck a girl's complexion. Even if a jury gave methe Purple Heart, this neighborhood holds no future: they'd still have up every rope from LaRue toPerona's Bar and Grill -- take my word, I'd be about as welcome as Mr. Frank E. Campbell. And if youlived off my particular talents, Cookie, you'd understand the kind of bankruptcy I'm describing. Uh, uh, Idon't just fancy a fade-out that finds me belly-bumping around Roseland with a pack of West Sidehillbillies. While the excellent Madame Trawler sashayes her twat in and out of Tiffany's. I couldn't take it.Give me the fat woman any day."
　　A nurse, soft-shoeing into the room, advised that visiting hours were over. Holly started to complain, andwas curtailed by having a thermometer popped in her mouth. But as I took leave, she unstopperedherself to say: "Do me a favor, darling. Call up theTimes , or whatever you call, and get a list of the fiftyrichest men in Brazil. I'mnot kidding. The fifty richest: regardless of race or color. Another favor -- poke
　　around my apartment till you find that medal you gave me. The St. Christopher. I'll need it for the trip."
　　around my apartment till you find that medal you gave me. The St. Christopher. I'll need it for the trip."
　　But Holly, ignoring my cheerful conviction that her flight would not go, continued her preparations -placing,I must say, the chief burden of them on me. For she had decided it would be unwise of her tocome near the brownstone. Quite rightly, too: it was under surveillance, whether by police or reporters orother interested parties one couldn't tell -- simply a man, sometimes men, who hung around the stoop. Soshe'd gone from the hospital to a bank and straight then to Joe Bell's Bar. "She don't figure she wasfollowed," Joe Bell told me when he came with a message that Holly wanted me to meet her there assoon as possible, a half-hour at most, bringing: "Her jewelry. Her guitar. Toothbrushes and stuff. And abottle of hundred-year-old brandy: she says you'll find it hid down in the bottom of the dirty-clothesbasket. Yeah, oh, and the cat. She wants the cat. But hell," he said, "I don't know we should help her atall. She ought to be protected against herself. Me, I feel like telling the cops. Maybe if I go back andbuild her some drinks, maybe I can get her drunk enough to call it off."
　　Stumbling, skidding up and down the fire escape between Holly's apartment and mine, wind-blown andwinded and wet to the bone (clawed to the bone as well, for the cat had not looked favorably uponevacuation, especially in such inclement weather) I managed a fast, first-rate job of assembling hergoing-away belongings. I even found the St. Christopher's medal. Everything was piled on the floor of myroom, a poignant pyramid of brassi┬res and dancing slippers and pretty things I packed in Holly's onlysuitcase. There was a mass left over that I had to put in paper grocery bags. I couldn't think how to carrythe cat; until I thought of stuffing him in a pillowcase.
　　Never mind why, but once I walked from New Orleans to Nancy's Landing, Mississippi, just under fivehundred miles. It was a light-hearted lark compared to the journey to Joe Bell's bar. The guitar filled withrain, rain softened the paper sacks, the sacks spilt and perfume spilled on the pavement, pearls rolled inthe gutter: while the wind pushed and the cat scratched, the cat screamed -- but worse, I was frightened,a coward to equal Jos└: those storming streets seemed aswarm with unseen presences waiting to trap,imprison me for aiding an outlaw.
　　The outlaw said: "You're late, Buster. Did you bring the brandy?"
　　And the cat, released, leaped and perched on her shoulder: his tail swung like a baton conductingrhapsodic music. Holly, too, seemed inhabited by melody, some bouncybon voyage oompahpah.Uncorking the brandy, she said: "This was meant to be part of my hope chest. The idea was, everyanniversary we'd have a swig. Thank Jesus I never bought the chest. Mr. Bell, sir, three glasses."
　　"You'll only need two," he told her. "I won't drink to your foolishness."
　　The more she cajoled him ("Ah, Mr. Bell. The lady doesn't vanish every day. Won't you toast her?"), thegruffer he was: "I'll have no part of it. If you're going to hell, you'll go on your own. With no further helpfrom me." An inaccurate statement: because seconds after he'd made it a chauffeured limousine drew upoutside the bar, and Holly, the first to notice it, put down her brandy, arched her eyebrows, as thoughshe expected to see the District Attorney himself alight. So did I. And when I saw Joe Bell blush, I had tothink: by God, hedid call the police. But then, with burning ears, he announced: "It's nothing. One of themCarey Cadillacs. I hired it. To take you to the airport."
　　He turned his back on us to fiddle with one of his flower arrangements. Holly said: "Kind, dear Mr. Bell.Look at me, sir."
　　He turned his back on us to fiddle with one of his flower arrangements. Holly said: "Kind, dear Mr. Bell.Look at me, sir."
　　The Carey chauffeur was a worldy specimen who accepted our slapdash luggage most civilly andremained rock-faced when, as the limousine swished uptown through a lessening rain, Holly stripped offher clothes, the riding costume she'd never had a chance to substitute, and struggled into a slim blackdress. We didn't talk: talk could have only led to argument; and also, Holly seemed too preoccupied forconversation. She hummed to herself, swigged brandy, she leaned constantly forward to peer out thewindows, as if she were hunting an address -- or, I decided, taking a last impression of a scene shewanted to remember. It was neither of these. But this: "Stop here," she ordered the driver, and we pulledto the curb of a street in Spanish Harlem. A savage, a garish, a moody neighborhood garlanded withposter-portraits of movie stars and Madonnas. Sidewalk litterings of fruit-rind and rotted newspaperwere hurled about by the wind, for the wind still boomed, though the rain had hushed and there werebursts of blue in the sky.
　　Holly stepped out of the car; she took the cat with her. Cradling him, she scratched his head and asked."What do you think? This ought to be the right kind of place for a tough guy like you. Garbage cans. Ratsgalore. Plenty of cat-bums to gang around with. So scram," she said, dropping him; and when he did notmove away, instead raised his thug-face and questioned her with yellowish pirate-eyes, she stamped herfoot: "I said beat it!" He rubbed against her leg. "I said fuck off!" she shouted, then jumped back in thecar, slammed the door, and: "Go," she told the driver. "Go. Go."
　　I was stunned. "Well, youare . Youare a bitch."
　　We'd traveled a block before she replied. "I told you. We just met by the river one day: that's all.Independents, both of us. We never made each other any promises. We never -- " she said, and hervoice collapsed, a tic, an invalid whiteness seized her face. The car had paused for a traffic light. Thenshe had the door open, she was running down the street; and I ran after her.
　　But the cat was not at the corner where he'd been left. There was no one, nothing on the street except aurinating drunk and two Negro nuns herding a file of sweet-singing children. Other children emerged fromdoorways and ladies leaned over their window sills to watch as Holly darted up and down the block, ranback and forth chanting: "You. Cat. Where are you? Here, cat." She kept it up until a bumpy-skinnedboy came forward dangling an old tom by the scruff of its neck: "You wants a nice kitty, miss? Gimme adollar."
　　The limousine had followed us. Now Holly let me steer her toward it. At the door, she hesitated; shelooked past me, past the boy still offering his cat ("Haifa dollar. Two-bits, maybe? Two-bits, it ain'tmuch"), and she shuddered, she had to grip my arm to stand up: "Oh, Jesus God. We did belong to eachother. He was mine."
　　Then I made her a promise, I said I'd come back and find her cat: "I'll take care of him, too. I promise."
　　She smiled: that cheerless new pinch of a smile. "But what about me?" she said, whispered, and shivered
　　again. "I'm very scared, Buster. Yes, at last. Because it could go on forever. Not knowing what's yoursuntil you've thrown it away. The mean reds, they're nothing. The fat woman, she nothing. This, though: mymouth's so dry, if my life depended on it I couldn't spit." She stepped in the car, sank in the seat. "Sorry,driver. Let's go."
　　again. "I'm very scared, Buster. Yes, at last. Because it could go on forever. Not knowing what's yoursuntil you've thrown it away. The mean reds, they're nothing. The fat woman, she nothing. This, though: mymouth's so dry, if my life depended on it I couldn't spit." She stepped in the car, sank in the seat. "Sorry,driver. Let's go."       (頼)
　　 